



													
													History of Modern India.




	1st Survey General of Bengal : James Rennel : 1767
	
	
	J and K me Dogra Rule : After 1846
	
	
	Danes sold, Tranquebar and serampore to EIC in 1845
	
	
	
	Brit Travelers : 
	
		'Hindu Manners and Customs' => Abbe Dubois ---> Written during the rise of Brits. 
		
		'Narrative of a Visit to the court of Sinde' ===> James Burnes
		
		'Travels into Bukhara' ----> Alexander Burnes
		
		'Diary of the Travels and Adventures in Upper India' ====> C.J.C Davidson
		
		'Travels and Adventures in the Province of Assam' ====> John Butler
		
		
		
	Non-Brit Travellers : 
	
		1) Victor Jacquemont
		
		2) Baron Charles ---> Travels in Kashmir and the Punjab
		
		3) William Moorcroft



	
	1776 : William Bolts ne bola ki, main EIC ka bhanda fodunga, lekin EIC ne iska Gand fod diya. 
	
	
	1780 : James Augustus Hickey : Published 1st Newspaper in India --> 'Bengal Gazette  a.k.a  Calcutta General Advertiser'. 
	
		- 2 saal me hi bhai ki press sieze kar li gayi. 


	1784 : Calcutta Gazette
	
	1788 : The Madras Courier
	
	1789 : The Bombay Herald 



	Nationalist Jounals: 

		i) The Hindu and Swadesimitran--> G. Subrimaniam Iyer

		ii)Kesari and Maharatta--> BGT
		
		iii)Bengalee--> Surendranath Banerjee
		
		iv)Amrit Bazar Patrika--> Ghosh Brothers (Sisir kumar and Motilal)
		
		v)Sudharak--> GKG

		vi)Indian Mirror--> N N Sen
		
		vii)Voice of India--> Dadabhai Naoroji
		
		viii)Hindustan and Advocate--> G P Verma
		


		ix) Tribune and Ain-i-Akbari--> Punjab
		
		x)Indu Prakash, Dnyan Prakash, Kal and Gujrati--> Maharashtra
		
		xi)Som Prakash Banganivasi and Sadharan--> Bengal



		xi) Indian Sociologist--> London, Shyamji Krishnaverma

		xii) Bande Mataram--> Paris, Madam Bhikaji kama
		
		xiii)Talwar--> Berlin, Birendranath Chattopadhyay
		
		xiv) Gadhar--> San Francisco, Lala Hardyal



	Rashtravadi Novels:-

		i) Anand Math, Rajsimha--> BCC(1882)
		
			- Anandamath---> 'Vandematarm'   and     Depiction of Sanyasi Revolt(1760s)
			
			- Rajsimha--> Final novel. 

		ii)Hind-ane-Britanica--> Ichararam Desai(1853 to 1912)

			- 1st Indian novel with political overtone. 				
			
		iii)India Today--> R.P Dutt

		iv) A.R Desai--> Social Background of Indian Nationalism

		v)  Girija Devi :--> Mohana Rajani(1931) --> Tamil
		
		vi) Ramatirthammal :--> Dasikalin Mosavalai (1936) --> Tamil

		vii) G.V. Krishna Rao :---> Keelubommalu (The Puppets, 1956) ---> Telugu

		viii) Vaikom Muhammad Basheer (1910 to 1994) :---> Balyakalasakhi (The Childhood Friends, 1944) ---> Mallu
		
		ix) Thakazhi Siva Sankara(mallu) ---> 1) Tottiyude Makan(Son of Scavanger)   and   Chemmeen(Shrimps) 
		



	Paintings:-	

		Company Paintings : Patna Kalam ----> 1840s me photography ke aa jane tak, famous rahi. 

  			i) Relief of Lucknow--> Thomas Jones Baker
  		
			ii)In Memoriam--> Joseph noel Paton


		
		Kalighat Paintings : 19th CE me aai in Calcutta. ---> Both mythological and ordinary people. 
		
			- Social Evils par bhi comment
			
		
		Nationalist Paintings : 
		
			Nandalal Bose
			
			Raja Ravi Verma
			
			Abanindranath Tagor ka Bengal School
			
			E.B. Havell
			
			Ananda Kentish Coomaraswamy	----> Sri Lankan Tamil 
		






	Colonial Historians : 
	
		James Mill,    Mountstuart Elphinstone,     Vincent Smith 
		
		
	
	Nationalist Historians : Didn't exist befor 1947.   Is se pehle ke nationalist historians---> Mainly dealt with ancient and medieval periods of Indian History. 
	
		- Lekin baad me, Detailed critique shuru ho gaya tha
		
		- Dadabhai Naoroji,    M.G Ranade,     G.V Joshi,    R.C.Dutt,    K.T.Telang,      G.K.Gokhale,      D.E.Wacha
		
		
		- Ye saare Nationalist leaders bhi Historians the : R.G Pradhan,      A.C.Mazumdar,      J.L.Nehru        Pattabhi Sitaramayya,    Tara Chand
		
		
		
	
	Marxist Historians : 
	
		1) Rajni Palme Dutt ---> India Today (1940 in England)
		
		2) A.R. Desai ---> Social Background of Indian Nationalism (1948)
		
		
		
	
	Subaltern Historian : 
	
		1) Ranajit Guha -- 1980s
		
		
	
	Feminazi Historians : 
	
		1) Pandita Ramabai : High Caste Hindu Woman (1887)
		
		2) Katherine Mayo : Mother India (1927)				









¯\_(ツ)_/¯¯\_(ツ)_/¯¯\_(ツ)_/¯¯\_(ツ)_/¯¯\_(ツ)_/¯¯\_(ツ)_/¯¯\_(ツ)_/¯¯\_(ツ)_/¯¯\_(ツ)_/¯¯\_(ツ)_/¯¯\_(ツ)_/¯¯\_(ツ)_/¯¯\_(ツ)_/¯¯\_(ツ)_/¯¯\_(ツ)_/¯¯\_(ツ)_/¯¯\_(ツ)_/¯¯\_(ツ)_/¯¯\_(ツ)_/¯¯\_(ツ)_/¯¯\_(ツ)_/¯


		Constantinople Fell to the Ottoman Turks : 1453
		
		Prince Henry of Portugal a.k.a Navigator==> Obsession with finding a new trade route to India 
		
			- Pope Nicholas V ne ise, 1454 me ek Bull diya---> 'Right to navigate the sea to the distant shores of the orient'. 
			
			
		1487 : Portuguese Navigator, Bartholomew Dias--> Rounded the Cape of Good Hope in Africa
		
		Treaty of Tordesillas(1494) ---> Portugal and Spain divided the non-christian world between them by an imaginary line in the Atlantic
		
		
		May 1498 :---> VDG arrived at Calicut at Sumurthi(zamorin)'s Port---> It was an entrepot.

	
	
	


	Europeans in India

           Portuguese
 
 		- VDG-> In May 1498, at Calicut(3 mahine ruka); came back again in 1501 and setup a factory at Cannanore and Cochin.
  
  		- Pedro Cavaral established a Factory at Calicut in 1500. (Cochin became their HQ)
  
  			Isne Arabs se lode liye. 
  			
  			Saale ne Calicut par bombardment ki. 
  			
  			Cochin and Cannanore ke rulers ke saath treaty ki. 
  
  		
  		- 1st Governor in India in 1505--> Francisco Almeida- Blue Water Policy(Cartaze System)--> To make them king in Indian Ocean. Fought naval battles with combined fleet of Egyptians and Gujrat.
  
  		- 2nd GG--> Alfanso Albaqurque- Real founder of Portuguese Power in the East		
  						
  				Established strongholds in Malabar, Malacca and East Africa 
  
   				Introduced permit system for non-portuguese ships
  				
  				Ship-building centres in the region par kabja kiya. 
  				
  				Acquired Goa in 1510 ---> 1st bit of Indian Territory to be in European Hands after, Alexander the Great
  				
  				Abolished sati
  				
  				New Crops--> Cashew, Tobacco; Coir plantations
  
  				
  				
  		- Next-> Nino-de-Cunha(1529 me Gov appoint hua)- Changed HQ to GOA 
  		
  			 Got island of Bassein from Bahadur Shah of Gujrat (Is bhai ke, Humayun lode le raha tha)
  			 
  			 Baad me, Bahadur Shah ko, 1537 me, Ship par bulake, uske gotte kaat diye. 
  			 
  			 Expansion in Bengal with Hoogly as HQ.
  

			
		Mangalore, Cannanore, Coachin and Calicut---> Ye sab inke trading ports the 
		
		East coast me : San Thome(Chennai)  and   Nagapatnam(Andhra) 
		
		
		
		1579 :---> Akbar ne Goa me letter bheja, 2 learned priests ke liye.---> Father Rodalfo Aquaviva  and   Antonio Moserrate
		
		1592 me 2nd mission
		
		1595 me 3rd mission  at Lahore. ---> Father Jerome Xavier  and  Emanuel Pinheiro
		
		
				Vedor-Da-Fazenda--> Revenue + Cargo officer.
		
				Forts were under Captains assisted by Factors.

				Introduced the system of Drilling groups of Infantry (on the spanish model)---> 1630s. ---> Ise pehle French ne adopt kiya, fir Brits ne, Fir Marathas and Sikhs



		1608 : Capt William Hawkins with his ship Hector, reached Surat. ----> brought letter from James I, King of England. ---> To mughal court of Jahangir. 
		
			- 1609 me, ye jahangir se mila, Even though Father Pinheiro ne bohot koshih ki rokne ki. 
			
			- Jahangir cutiye, ne Hawking ko Mansab bhi diya, Salary bhi di, or Mubarak Shah ki beti bhi de di. 
			
			- Lekin, Portuguese ne, Brits ko, Surat port me enter karne se rok diya. 
			
			- 1611 me Hawkins gussa hoke, court chor ke bhaag gaya. 
		
		
		1612 : Captain Best (Ship-Dragon) ne, Portuguese ki maa chod di----> Jahangir is se kafi impress ho gaya. ---> Lost Surat to the Brits. 
		
		
		1613 : Portuguese chutiye, Mughal ships agwa karne lage. 
		
		
		1632 : Mughals ne, portuguese se, Hoogly capture kar liya, jo inhe, 1579 me ek farman se mila tha.  In saalo ne, Mumtaz Mahal ki 2 ladkio ko randi bana liya tha. 


		1663 : Malabar Coast ke saare Portuguese coast, par Dutch logo ne kabja kar liya. 

		
		1683 : Marathas Invaded Goa
			
						
		1739 : Marathas ne, Salsette and bassein capture kar liya inse. 



	

	 Dutch
	 
	 	1596 : 1st Dutchman to reach Sumatra---> Cornelis De Houtman
   		
   		1602- East India Company of Netherlands.
   
   		1605- 1st factory in Masulipatnam in Andhra. Captured Nagapatnam(from portuguese), near chennai and made it their main stronghold in South India.
   		
   		
   		1609 : Factory in Pulicat(north madras).    
   		
   		1616 : Surat
   		
   		1645 : Karaikal 
   		
   		1653 : Chinsura
   		
   		1658 : Kasimbazar, Patna, Balasore, nagapatam
   		
   		1663 : Cochin
  
	  		 Carried Indigo maufactured in Yamuna valley, Silk from Bengal Gujrat and Coromandal, Saltpeter from bihar and Opium-Rice from ganga valley.
	   
	   		Monopolised trade in Black pepper and spices. 
		   
   		1667- Got ass kicked by British and left India.
 
 
 		1759 : Battle of Hoogly me Brits se haare. ---> Crushing blow to their ambitions in India. 




	English

		   1580 : Francis Drake---> Voyage around the world
		   
		   1558 : English victory over the Spanish Armada
		
			
		   1600- Queen Elizabeth I gave charter to EIC to carry trade in Indies for 15 years.( In 1609 extended to infinte years ).

		   1609- Captain Hawkings arrived in Court of Jahangir. But portuguese cock-blocked his ambitions to setup surat factory.

		   1611- Masulipatnam me trade karna shuru kar diya tha. 1616 me waha Factory banai. 	

		   1612- Thomas Best defeated portuguese at sea and got permission to establish factory at surat.(1613)(Under Thomas Aldworth)

		   1615- Thomas Roe came to court of Jahangir as Ambassador of King James I. Got permission to setup factories at Ahmadabad, Agra and Broach.

		   1632- "Golden Farman" by Golconda Sultan allowed them to trade duty free in Golconda for some Annual payment.

		   1639- Francis Day got permission from ruler of Chandragiri to built factory at Madras-- Later became fort st. George which replaced HQ from Masulipatnam for South. 

		   1651- Shah Suja of Bengal allowed them to trade for annual payment. Started factory at hoogly, Kasimbazar, patna and Rajmahal. 	 

		   1662- Britain Got Bombay from Portugal as Dowry. Given to EIC in 1668. In 1687, it was made the HQ for western Presidency(earlier-Surat).( Made peace with Portuguese ).

		   1686- Hooghly was sacked by Shaista Khan. 

		   1690- Job Charnok ne negotiatiion karke, Sutanuti naam ki jagah par lot aane ke liye raai kar liya. 
		   
		   1696- Zamindar revolt ke bahane, Settlement ko fortify kar liya. 

		   1698- Bought zamindari of 3 villages in Bengal- Sutanuti, Gobindpur and Kalikata. Fortified the settlement and named it Fort Williams(1700).
		   		 
		   		 Became seat of east, Sir Charles Eyre as it's 1st president.
   
   		   1715- Farukhsiyar issued 3 farmans- "Magna Carta of Company" ---> English Mission led by John Surman---> Bengal, Gujrat and Hyderabad. 
   		   
   		   	i) Duty free Import and Export in Bengal, duty free trade in Surat and Hyderabad for some annual payment 
   		   	
   		   	ii)Issue dastak(passes) for transportation of goods. 
   		   	
   		   	iii) Mint coins in Bombay, allowed in all mughal India.
   		   	
   		   	iv) Duty free trade in Hyderabad and Surat. 
   		   	
   		   	
   		   1708 : Whigs wali company EIC me merge ho gayi---> 'United Company of Merchants of Enland Trading to the East Indies'. ---> In saalo ne hi fir, Brit Political power Establish ki India me. 	
   		   	
   
   
   
   
 	 French
 
 		  Last to come to India. 1664- French east India company was started. (King- Louis 14th). 50 year monopoly to trade in Indian and Pacific oceans. 
 		
 		  1st factory in Surat in 1667 by Caron. 1669- In masulipatnam. 1673- Setup a township in Chandranagar near Calcutta. 
 		
 		  1674- Pondicherry was founded by Francois Martin, who replaced caron as the Governor. 
 		
 		  Mahe, karaikal, Kasim-Bazar and balasore--other coastal factories. 
 		
 		  1693- Dutch(Allied with Brits) captured pondicherry. Got it back after Treaty of Ryswick. Power grew for the next 30-40 years then :-
   
 		  Spanish war of succession ki wajah se French chodo ko apne, Surat, Masulipatnam and Bantam wale factories ko abandon karna pada tha. 
 		  
 		  Dec 31, 1706 ko Martin bhaiya, expire ho gaye. 
 
 
 
      Anglo-French Struggles:-
    
    1st carnatic war--> Due to Austrian war of succession. French seized Madras. Concluded in 1748 with Treaty of Aix-La-Chapple, Brits got back Madras. French got back their North American Territories. 
     (1740 - 1748) 
    (A small French army deafeated a Britsh ally(Indian guy) with much bigger army in Battle of st.Thome).
	
     Dupleix invloved tha isme, or 2nd wale me bhi.     
    	
    	- Ye bhai pehla European tha, to get involved in the randi-rona of Indians. 
    	
    	- Ise, 2nd Carnatic war ke baad, wapas bula liya gaya tha. He was replaced by Godeheu who was a faggot. 
    	
                
                                             |Deccan|                                |Carnatic|
    2nd Carnatic war--> French Supported -  Muzaffar jang(GranSon of Nawab)          Chanada Sahib(Son-in-law of Old Nawab of Carnatic)  	 	--> Ye dono appoint hone chahte the. 
     (1749 to 1754)           
                        Brits  Supported -  Nasir Jang(Son of Nizam)            	 Anwar-Ud-din(Appointed as new Nawab)				--> In dono ko appoint kiya gaya tha. 
    
    		- Muzaffar + Chanda + French ne,  Battle of Ambur (1749) me, Anwar-ud-din ke tote uda diye. 
    			
    			Muzaffar bhai, Deccan ke Subahdar ban gaye or inhone, Dupleix sir ko, Krishna River ke south ki sari territories ka Governor appoint kar diya. 
    			
    		- Clive ko gussa aa gaya and he captured Arcot.  Chanda sahib ki gardan utar di, kisi or mulle ne.  Marathas came to the rescue of Clive and Stinger Lawrence.
    
    	       - Brits won under Robert Clive, French lost under Dupleix. French and British agreed not to interfere in quarrels of native princes. 
   
      (Dependency of Indian rulers on foreigners, they became clients of foreigners ).

    
    
    
    3rd Carnatic War--> Due to 7 years war in Europe.
     (1758 to 1763)
     
    Count-de-lally captured Fort.St David in 1758. Battle of Wandiwash--> 1760, Sir Eyre Coote defeated Lally. Treaty of Peace of Paris in 1763 restored French possessions, but their political influence was gone.





	 Danes

		   Danish East India Company was started in 1616; Founded a factory neat Tanjore, Their principle settlement was near Calcutta(Serampur) . Better known for their missionary activities. 





													BRITISH CONQUEST OF INDIA
 
   Aurangzeb's Successors--> 

     i) Bahadur Shah I(1709-12)--"Shah-e-Bekhabar". Banda Bahadur attacked during his reign. Released, Shahu the Maratha Prince. 
     
     ii)Jahandar Shah for 1 year after him. He introduced the "Izara" system to improve financial conditions of empire.  Abolished Jiz-oh-yeahhh. 
     
     iii)Farrukhsiyar(1713-19)--Sayyid Brothers(The king makers). Abolished Jizya and Piligrimage taxes. Farman to Brits in 1717. He was killed by his nobles.
     
     iv) Muhammad Shah Rangeela Beti****(1719-48)-- Killed Sayyid Brothers with help of Nizam-ul-mulk(in 1724 he became the vizir and founded the independent state of Hyderabad ). Nadir Shah fucked him.
     
     v)Ahmad Shah(1748-54)--Chutiya who let Uddham Bai( Queen Mother ) to rule.
     
     vi)Alamgir II(1754-58)--Battle of Plassey was fought. 
     
     vii)Shah Alam II(1759-1806)--3rd BOP + Battle of Buxar. Treaty of Allahbad- Came under British protection. Gave them Diwani of BBO.    
     
     viii)Akbar II(1806-37)-- Title of Raja to Rammohan Roy. In 1835 coins bearing mughal name were stopped.
     
     ix)Bahadur Shah II--Sent to rangoon where he died in 1862. 


 Independent States of Hyderabad, Awadh, Bengal and Punjab came up during the reign of Muhammad Shah Rangeela Beti****( 1719-48). 

 Nadir Shah attacked in 1738.
 
  Ahmad Shah Abdali came between 1748-67. In 1761, defeated Marathas in 3rd BOP. 


	
	Hyderabad : 
		
		FOunder : Asaf-Jah house--> Kilich Khan, a.k.a The Nizam-ul-Mulk
		
			- Isne, Mubariz Khan ki gardan utari thi, at Battle of Shakr-Kheda in 1724. 
			
			- 1725, became the viceroy. --->Called himslef, 'Asaf-jah'. 
			
	
	
	Awadh : 
	
		-Founder :Saadat Khan a.k.a Burhan-ul-Mulk.   --> Ye bhai ek Shia tha. ----> Nadir Shah ne jab badi booty mangi to bhai ne apni nas kaat li. 
		
		- Iske baad, Awadh ka Nawab bana, Safdar Jang. 
		
	
	Bengal : 
	
		- Founder = Murshid Kuli Khan
		
		- 1727 me iska beta, Shuja-ud-din bana. ---> Iske baad aaya, Sarfaraz Khan, jiski 1740 me gardan utar di gayi, by ALivardi khan. --> Dy Gov of Bihar. 
		
		
		
	Kerala : 
	
		- Marthanda Varma ne, Kerala ki independent state establish ki thi. ---> With Travancore as his capital. 
		
		- Boundry extend ki from cochin to Kanyakumari. 
		
		- Western model par apni army organise ki. 			
	
	
	
	Suraj Mal Jaat, died in 1763. 

			
	
	Ranjit Singh : Son of Mahan SIngh---> Leader of Sukarchakiya misl. 
	
		- Sutlej to Jhelum tak ka area apne under kar liya. 
		
		- 1799 me Lahore conquer kiya.  
		
		- 1802 me Amritsar conquer kiya. 
		
		- Treaty of Lahore : Accepted brit rights over, cis-sutlej territories. 
		
		- 1838 me, Tripartite Treaty sign ki, with Shah Shuja and EIC. ---> PRovided passage to Brit troops through Punjab
		
		- Died in 1839
		
		
	
	Rohilakhand ----> Mid-18th CE ke beech, large scale Afghan immigration hua tha. 
	
		- Nadir SHah ki invasion ke baad, Ali Muhammad khan ne, Rohilakhand naam ka kingdom shuru kiya. 
		
		- Iske north me tha, kumaon foothills  and  South me, Ganga. 	
		
		
	Farrukhabad ----> Same time pe, Mohammad Khan Bangash naam ke Afghan ne, Farrukhsiyar and Muhammad Shah naam ke bande ke time pe. 	
			
			
						SOCIO-ECONOMIC SITUATION BEFORE BRITISH

 
 	Items of Imports : 
 	
 		1) Persian Gulf Region : Pearls,  Raw Silk,  Wool,   Dates,  Dried Fruits  and  Rose Water
 		
 		2) Arabia : Coffee,  Gold,  Drugs and Honey
 		
 		3) China : Tea,  Sugar,  Porcelain  and Silk
 		
 		4) Tibet : Gold, Musk and Woollen Cloth
 		
 		5) Africa : Ivory and Drugs
 		
 		6) Europe : Woolen Cloth,  Copper, Iron, lead and Paper
 		
 	
 	Items of Exports : 
 	
 		 Cotton Textiles,   Raw Silk,  Silk fabrics,   Hardware,   Indigo,   Saltpetre,  Opium,     Rice,     Wheat,   Sugar,   Pepper   ,  Precious stones and Drugs. 
 		 
 		 
 	
 	
 	Kunjali Maraikkars : Mulle Shipbuilders, used by Zamorin of Calicut. 	 
 
 
 	Chatuspathis or Tols ----> Bihar and Bengal me, Centres of higher education. 
 	
 	
 	Kasi, Tirhut(Mithila), Nadia and Utkala---> Sanskrit education 
 	
 	
 	Maratha General Prashuram Bhau ----> Tried to promote widow remarriage but failed. 
 	
 	
 	Sawai Jai Singh : Built the pink city of Jaipur
 	
 		- 5 astro observatories at, Delhi, Jaipur, Benaras, Mathura and Ujjain
 		
 		- Set of Time-tables---> JiJ Muhammad-Shahi
 
 	Lucknow ---> Asaf-ud-Daula built the Bada Imambara in 1784. 
 
 
 	Kanchan Nambiar ---> Mallu Poet
 
	Tayyumanivar(1706-44)-- Tamil Sittar Poet. Protested against temple rule and Caste system.

	Waris Shah composed Heer-Ranjha in Punjabi.  
	
	Shah Abdul Latif composed Risalo in Sindhi.

	
	Asaf-ud-Daula---> In 1784---> Built Bada Imambara at Lucknow. 
	
	
	Urdu Poets : Mir, Sauda, Nazir and Mirza Ghalib
	
		
		
		
		BRITISH ANNEXATIONS THROUGH DIRECT ACTION




	Anglo-Bengal


		- 60% of British imports form Aisa consisted of Goods from Bengal. 
		
		- 1630s me---> Established factories at, Balasore, Hooghly, Kasimbazar, Patna and Dacca. 
		
		- 1690s---> Calcutta was founded. 
		
		- 1756 tak, Alivardi khan ne rule kiya----> stopped paying tributes to the Mughal Emperor. 
		
		- Bhai ke marne ke baad---> Siraj-ud-daula aa gaya
		
			- Defeated Shaukat Jang or iski gardan utari
			
			- Fucked Ghasiti Begum
			
			- Mir Jafar ko dismiss karke, Mir Madan ko appoint kiya . 
			
			- Mohan Lal naam ke Kashmiri bande ko, Overall Admin lagaya---> He acted as the Prime Minister. 
		
		
		Battle of Plasey-
		
			- Misuse of Dastaks
			
			- Fortification of Calcutta
			
			- Asylum to Krishna Das
		
			 i) Mir jafar was made nawab ii) Company got zamindari of 24 prarganas. iii) Resident posted at nawab's court.
		 
         		Mir Jafar hatched a conspiracy with the Dutch at Chinsaura + Failed to pay the company---> Replaced with Mir Kasim. (Bedara me Brits ne Dutch ka Gand Mara in 1759)
	
		       In return company got--> i)Burdawan, Mindanpur and Chittagong.ii) Money for fighting in South.


	Mir Kasim : Signed a treaty with Brits in 1760, jiske baad, Mir Jafar ke badle, ise Nawab bana diya gya. 
	
				- Gave them the districts of Burdwan, Midnapur and Chittagong
				
				- Sylhet ki Chunam trade ka 50% share milega company ko. 
				
				- Mir Kasim's enemry were company's enemy. 
				
		
		He was the ables nawab, among the successors of Alivardi Khan. 
		
		- Shifted capital, from Murshidabad to Munger in Bihar. 
		
		- Reorganised bureaucracy.   And  remodelled the army		




	Battle of Buxar--> Major Hector Munro ne, 22nd October, 1764 ko, teeno ko koda kar liya, Buxar me. 
	
		i) Misuse of Dustak by company officials

		 ii) Ram Narayan of Bihar's refusal to listen to Nawab

		 iii)Mir Kasim made a Confideracy with Awadh's Sujah-Ud-daula and Mughal Shah Alam II. 
		 
	British won under Hector Munro. 
	
	Mir Jafar was made the nawab. 
	
	Treaty of Allahbad--i)Duty free trade in Bengal ii) Diwani of Bengal, Bihar and orissa iii) Rs 53 lakh annually for Nizamat of these province as well.
	
	Awadh was made a Buffer State. Shah Alam was made to reside in Allahbad under Company's protection.



	Dual Government in Bengal (1765 to 1772)
	
		- Robert Clive ne introduce kiya----> Rule of 2--> EIC and Nawab
		
		---> Both, diwani(collecting revenue) and Nizamat(Police and Judicial functions)--> Came under, Brits. 
		
		- Exercised diwani rights as the diwan  and   Nizamat rights as its rights to nominate the deputy subahdar. 
		
		- Acquired, Diwani functions from the emperor and  Nizamat functions from the subahdar of Bengal. 
		
		- Company ne 2 dy Diwans appoint kiye---> Mohammad Reza Khan for Bengal     and      Raja Sitab Roy for Bihar. 




  Anglo-Mysore 


	1565 : Battle of Talikota
	
	1612 : Mysore me aaya, Wodeyars ka kingdom
	
		- Chikka Krishnaraj Wodeyar II ruled from 1734 to 1766. 


	
	1761 : Hyder Ali became de-facto ruler 
	
		- Haidar Ali setup an Arms factory in Dindigul(TN) with French help. He was defeated by Marathas in 1764,66,71 under Madhavrao. 
	
	
	
    1st AM war(1767-69) -->
	 
	 - British+Nizam+Maraths vs Haider over Arcot.
	  
	 - Haider reached Madras and signed the TREATY OF MADRAS.
	  
	 - British promised to protect Mysore if Attacked by someone else. No gain,No loss.
	 
	 
   2nd AM war(1780-84)--> 
	
	Marathas attacked and Brits dindu Nuffin + French(through their base in MAHE) were siding with Haider + AMerican War of Independence bhi shuru ho chuka tha. 
	
	So British tried to capture Mahe(French clay on Malabar coast). Haider suffered Defeat at Porto-Novo.
	
	He died of cancer(Gutka-Mukesh RiP). 
	 
	Tipu signed a TREATY OF MANGALORE. No gain, No loss.


   3rd AM war(1790-92)--> 
	
	Tipu attacked Travancore on April 1790. ---> Kyunki, Travancore ne, Dutch logo se, Jalkottal and Cannanore khareed liya tha, in the Coachin state (Jo Tipu ke under tha) 
	
	Brits under cornwallis won and TREATY OF SERINGAPATNAM was signed--i)Half of Tipu's territory gone ii) Rs 3 crore war damage.


   4th AM war(1799)--> 
	
	Tipu was accussed by Wellesly to conspire against Brits, Marathas and Nizam. 
	
	Tipu got REKT in 18 days.


	Mysore given back to Wodeyars. In 1831- Bentinck took over( Misgovernance ). In 1881-  Ripon gave back. 





     Anglo-Maratha

	Bajirao I(1720-40)--> Greatest Peshwa. Created a confideracy of Maratha Chiefs, who ruled in their areas under the name of Maratha king, Shahu.  Another- Peshwa Madhavrao I. 

	- Prominent Maratha Families : 
	
		1) Baroda ke Gaekwad
		
		2) Nagpur ke Bhonslle
		
		3) Indore ke Holkars
		
		4) Gwalior ke Sindhia
		
		5) Poona ke Peshwa


	1761 me 3rd BoP haar gaye. 
	
	1772 me, Madhavrao shaheed ho gaya. 


	1st A-Mar war(1775-82)--> 
	      
	      - Raghunathrao(The Beti****) who killed 5th Peshwa Narayanrao vs Nana Phadnavis( who fought on behalf of Sawai-Madhavarao) . 
	
	      - Beti**** signed Treaty of Surat with british and gave them Salsette and Bassein for 2500 soldiers.  Lekin, Calcutta wale Brits, Naraz. 
	      
	      - Inhone, Colonel kate Upton ko bheja, apne bobe dikha ke, nayi treaty sign karne ke liye---> Treaty of Purandhar, 1776. 
	      
	      - 1777 me, Nana Phadnavis ne, French logo ko, west coast me ek port banane ko de diya---> Is se Brits,bhadak uthe and they sent a force towards Pune. 
	      
	      - Mahadji Scindia defeated British and Treaty of Wadgaon was signed in 1779---> 1775 ke baad jo bhi territories acquire ki thi wo wapas karo. 
	      
	      - But Hastings defeated Marathas and signed Treaty of Salbai in 1782- Brits got salsette, Marathas got Bassein. 
	      
	      		- Haider Ali shoudl return all the territory taken from English and the Nawab of Arcot. 
	      		
	      		- Peshwa should not support any other European Nation.
	      		
	      		- Mahadji Sindhia should be the mutual guarantor fro the proper observance of the terms of the treaty. 


    1795 me, Peshwa Madhavrao Narayan , chat se kood gaya. 
	
	
	2nd A-Mar war(1803-05)-->
	
		-Bajirao II( Son of Beti****) became Peshwa.
		
		- Nana Phadnavis ko, Chief Minister bana diya gaya.  Lekin, Nana ji passed away in 1800. 
		
		- Agle saal, chutiye Peshwa ne josh me aake, Jaswantrao Holkar ke bhai ki nas utar di. ----> Jaswantrao bhayanak gussa ho gaya or, Sindhia + Bajirao II ki combined forces par chadh dora. 
		
		- Jaswantrao jeet bhi gaya, at Hadapsar on 25th October 1802 ---> Places, Vinayakrao on the Peshwa's Seat. 
		
		- Bajirao II signed Treay of Bassein with British and gave them Surat+Money+permanent Britsh troops in Maratha territory for 6000 soldiers. 
		
		- Wellesly defeated combined armies of Bhonsle(Treaty of Devgaon), Scindia(Treaty of SurajianJangaon) and Holkar(Treaty of Rajpurghat).  


		Brits stationed their Troops in Poona after this war.     Is se pehle unke troops the in Mysore,  Hyderabad and Lucknow. 
		
		Treaty of Bassein, "Gave the English the key to India".
		
		
		
	3rd A-Mar war(1817-19)-->
	
		- 1813 me Compan ki Monopoly on trade ended---> Needed more markets. 
		
		- Over Pindars vs Lord Hastings.
		
		- Bajirao II called all Marathas but got their asses handed over to them( Treaties of Poona, Gwalior and Mandasor with Peshwa, Scindia and Holkar). 
		
		- Maratha cofideracy was dissolved in 1818. 

		- Shiavji ke ek vanshaj, Pratap Singh ko, Satara ki ek choti principality ka ruler bana diya gaya. 



    Anglo-Sindh


	- 1758 me, Brits ne, Thatta me ek Factory banai. ---> Ghulam Shah ki marji se. Ye Kallora Raja hua karte the.   
	
	- 1761 me, Ghulam Shah ne Brit resident ke saath kuch agreements bhi kiye. TO not allow foreigners etc. 
	
	- Lekin, 1775 me, Sarfraz Khan ne Factory ban karwadi. 
	
	- Iske baad, Balochi, Talpuras aa gaye or unhone, Kallora logo ki gaand par laat maar ke unhe bhaga diya. 

	- Sindh in 1780s ruled by 4-yaar Talpuras( Baluchis ). British feared Invasion by Napoleon( joint invasion plan with Alexander I of Russia in 1808). Envoys were sent to Kabul, lahore and Tehran.
	
	- Nicholas Smith ne, Treaty sign karli --> i) No Frenchies in Sindh    
	
	- Treaty of 1832-- Bentnick-Amirs. i)Free passage on Indus ii) No English merchant would settle in Sindh .

	- Lord Auckland in 1836 feared Russain Invasion +  wanted Influence over Afghanistan. Signed treaty with Amirs( feared Ranjit singh). Sindh turned into British protectorate. Resident was placed. 
s
	- Tripartie Treaty in 1838 among Brits, Sikhs and Shah-Suja(wannabe Afghan Ruler) under which SS was supposed to give up his soverign right over Sindh.

	- Sindh accepted Subsidiary Alliance in 1839.

	- Sindh was acquired in 1843, under GG Elenborough. Charles Napier was appointed it's governor. 






	Anglo-Punjab

	  - GGS ke marne ke baad, Banda Bahadur ne, Mughal Bahadur Shah ko Fuck off bol diya. 

	  - After Banda Bahadur's execution by Farukh siyar-- Sikh polity divided into 2 groups--i)Bandai(Liberals) ii)Tat-Khalsa(orthodox).

	  - Kapur-singh-Faizalpuria organised them into Dal-Khalsa in 1784. --Budha dal(Old), Tarun Dal(Young amry).

	  - After ASA's raid, Sikhs organised themselves in Misls( Military Brotherhood/Democratic setup).

	  - Ranjit Singh- Sukarchakiya Misl, appointed as Governor of Lahore in 1799 by Afghan ruler Zaman Shah. In 1805 acquired Jammu and Amritsar. 

	  - 1807 me, Lord Minto ne, Charles Metcalfe ko bheja, Lahore. 
	  
	  - In 1809 he signed Treaty of Amritsar with the Brits--i)Accepted Satluj as the boundry b/w sikhs and british India. 

		- Ranjit Singh ab puri tarah se West par focus kar sakta tha, isliye. 
		
		- Captured, Multan (1818),  Kashmir(1819)  and  Peshawar(1834) 
		
		
	  - Signed Tripartie treaty in 1838, but refused to give Brits passage to go and attack Dost Mohammad. Died in 1839.

	 - 1839 me he Ranjit ka beta, Kharak Singh bhi mar gaya. 
	 
	 - Or Funeral se wapas aate time, Kharak Singh ke bete, Nav Nihal Singh ki bhi death ho gayi. 
	
	- Iske baad, Sikho ne, Brits ko apni territory se wapas aane ki permission de di, Afghanio ke haaho gand marne par, or dobara, jab wo Afhanio ki gand lene ja rahe the, to avenge their defeat. 
	
	- Nav ke marne ke baad, Ranjir ke ek or Sher Singh ko----> Oh No, he was murdered in 1843. 
	
	- Iske baad , Ek or bete, minor son, with Rani Jindan as regent and  Hira Singh DOgra As Wazir.     Agle saal Hira Singh ki bhi gardan utar di gayi. 
	
	- Rani Jindan ke Bhai , Jawahar Singh ko wazir ---> oh no, he was murdered in 1845. 
	
	- Rani ko chodne wala, Lal Singh, Army ko pyara ho gaya and became the Wazir---> And Master Teja Singh was appointed as the commander of the forces. 
	
	
	
	
	1st Anglo-Sikh war(1845-46)- 
	
		-When sikh army crossed satluj. Brits won, Treaty of Lahore was signed--    Sale, Teja Singh and Lal Singh, dono Brits ke saath ho liye. 
		
			i) Brits got Jalandhar doab 
			
			ii)British resident at lahore court(Henry Lawrence)
			
		      iii) Jammu Kashmir sold to Gulab singh who payed brits Rs75 lakhs. 

			
			Sikh is se bhadak gaye to unhe shaant karne ke liye, ek or treaty ki gayi---> Treaty of Bhairowal. 
			
				- Brits, Rani Jindan ke jinde pakad use, Banaras le gaye, or khub chudai ki. 
		


	2nd Anglo-Sikh War(1848-49)-Mulraj, Gov of Multan murdered 2 british officer when he was asked to resign--Brits won under Lord Dalhousie-
	
		 i)Punjab was annexed 
		 
		 ii) 3-membered board to govern Punjab( Lawrance brothers and Charles Mansel).

			
		- Battle of Gujrat bhi isi me hui thi---> Feb 21, 1849 ---> Sikh + Their Afghan Allies were defeated.    Gujrat, BC, modi wala Gujrat nahi, balki Jhelum river wala. 

		
		1853 me is board ko nullify kar diya gaya, and Punjab was placed under a chief Commissioner.   
		
			- John Lawrence became the 1st Chief Commissioner. 




    BRITISH ANNEXATIONS THROUGH OTHER MEANS 

	1)Policy of Ring Fence-- Creating Buffer zones; By Warren Hastings
		
		- Ex- Defence of Awadh from Marathas and Afghans to secure defence of Bengal.



	2)Subsidiary Alliance--Extension of Ring fence; By Wellesly(1789-1805)
	
		- Over 100 small and big states signed SA. Although it was the French Dupleix who 1st gave troops on hire 

		- Permanent Stationing of British troops in the native ruler's territory + Pay for it's maintainence + British Resident at court + No other European with prior approval of Brits + 
		
		- Can't negotiate with other Indian Rulers without consulting GG 
		
		- British would defend + Not interfere in Internal Matters (lol, what a deal)
		

  	1st state- Awadh(1765);

 		Nawab of Carnatic-1787;  
 
 		Nizam of Hyderabad-1798;
 
 		Ruler of Mysore+Tanjore-1799;
  
  	        Peshwa-1801;Bhonsle Berar- 1803;
   
    		Scindia-1804; Rajput states- 1818;
    
     		Holkars last marathas to accept in 1818.





	3)Doctrine of Lapse-- Not started by, but applied frequently by Dlahousie(1848-56)
	
		Satra-1848;            Jhansi and Nagpur-1854;  other small-- Jaitpur, Sambhalpur, bhagat



	BRITISH INDIA-NEIGHBOUR RELATIONS


	I) BHUTAN- 

		Occupation of Assam-1816. 1865- Brits forced Bhutanese to surrender passes leading to Assam. These areas became known for Tea-Plantions.


	II)NEPAL- 
		
		1801- Brits annexed Gorakhpur, During Lord Hasting's period(1813-23) 
		
			-Gurkhas captured Butwal and Sheoraj.
			
			- Brits defeated them and Signed TREATY OF SAGAULI in 1816 -
			
				i)British resident in Nepal 
				
				ii) We got Garhwal, Kumaon and Terai 
				
				iii)Nepalis withdrew from Sikkim 



	III)BURMESE-- Timber,French,Market and Dick
	
		1st Burma war(1824-26)- When Burmese occupied Aarakan and Manipur. 
			
			-Treaty of Yandaboo--
			
				i)Brits got Arakan 
				
				ii)Manipur recognised as Independent state 
				
				iii)British resident at capital Ava


		2nd Burma war(1852)- When Brits occupied Pegu, the only coastal district of Burma for Timber
		
		3rd Burma war(1885)- Timber+French, Burma merged with India. Seperated in 1935. Got Independence in 1948.



	IV)Tibet- Russain Influence of Lahasa, Curzon, Younghousband, 
	
		Treaty of Lahasa(1904)--i) We got Chumbi valley for 75 years ii) Pay Rs 25 lakh iii)Don't fuck with Sikkim



	V)Afghansitan- Search for Scientific Frontier for India, Russian threat, Under Auckland(1836)-Forward Policy. 

		1st Anglo-Afghan war(1839-42)- Brits lost

			policy of masterly Inactivity by John Lawrence(1864-69)
				
			Policy of Proud Reserve by Lytton and 
	
	
	2nd Afghan war(1870-80)- When Sher Ali(Son of DOst) refused to accept a British resident--Treaty of Gandamak(1879) was signed with Sher Ali's son. A british resident was stationed.



	PRE-1857 RESISTENCE 
 
    i)Sanyasi Revolt(1763-1800)--Famine of 1770; Peasants+Ex-Soldiers; Crushed by Warren Hastings; Hindu-Muslim unity; Debby Choudhary--Women; Bankim Chandra's Anandmath based on this.
   ii)MoaMari Revolt(1769-99)--Low caste peasants, follower of Annirudhdeva. In Assam, challenged Ahom King. Ahom king requested British help.
  iii)Raja of VisionGram(1794)- Raja died fighting. Northern Circar, Near Vishakhapatnam.
   iv)Kerala Verma Pazhassi Raja(1800)-Head of Kottayam, died fighting brits in 1805.
    v)Civil Rebellion of Benaras(1799)-Wazir Ali khan--Massacre of benaras.
   vi)Poligar Revolt(1795-1805)-Madurai, North Arcot; Leader-Katta-bomb Nayak; Over taxation
  vii)Dewan Vellu Thampi's Revolt(1808)- Travancore;  Vellu committed Harakiri
 viii)Cutch Rebellion(1816-32)- Raja Bharmal II
   ix)Paika Rebellion(1817)- Traditional landed Militias of Odisha, Bakshi Jagbandhu; 
    x)Ahom Revolt(1828)- When Britis refused to leave after 1st BUrmese war
   xi)Kuka Revolt(1840)- Punjab; Baba Ram Singh(Founder of Namdharis); Inititally a purification movement of sikhism; Incorporated ideas of Swadeshi and Non-Cooperation

    Peasants Movement:-
      i)Narkelberia --WB; Titu-Mir; Merged with Wahabi movement
     ii)Pagal-Panthis--Hajong-Garo tribes; 
     iii)Moplah
  
   Tribal Movements:-
      i)Pahariya Rebellion- Raja Mahal Hills(1778)
     ii)Chaur Uprising(Bengal)- a.k.a Jungal Mahal revolt
    iii)Kol Mutiny(1831)- Hazaribagh; under Bhuddo Bhagat
     iv)Ho and Munda(1820-1837)- Singhbhum, jharkhand; Mundas in 1900 under Birsa
      v)Santhal Rebellion(1855)- Rajmahal hills(Bihar), Under Siddhu and Kannu
     vi) Koya revolt-Andhra
    vii) Ramosi- Western Ghat under Chittur singh(1822)

REVOLT OF 1857
    
   Delhi- General Bhakt Khan------------John Nicholson
   Kanpur- Nana saheb-------------------Colin Campbell
   Lucknow- Begum Hazrat Mahal----------Henry Lawrence
   Bareilly- Khan Bahadur
   Bihar- Kunwar singh
   Faizabad- Molvi Ahmadullah
   Jhansi- Laxmi bai--------------------Hugh Rose


SOCIO-RELIGIOUS MOVEMENTS

   Reformists- Brahmo Samaj, Prarthana Samaj, Aligarh Movement
   Revivalist- Arya Samaj, Deobandi Movement 


   Sati abolished--1829
   Female Infanticide--1795 and 1804
   Compulsory registration of birth--1870

  Widow Remarriage:
   i)PICV- Sanskrit College Calcuta; Hindu Widow Remarriage Act,1856; Cited Vedic Texts
  ii)Jagganath Shankar Seth + Bhai Diju-- Girl Education   
 iii)Vishnu Shashtri Pandit--Widow remarriage association
  iv)Karsondas Mulji- Satya Prakash in Gujrati
   v)DK KArve- West INdia
  vi)BraveDick Pantilu- Madras
 
  Child Marriage:
   Native Child Marriage act,1872
   B M Malabari- Age of Consent act,1891--Age>12
   Sharda Act(1930)- 18 boys, 14 girls
   
  Women Education:
 Missionaries: Calcutta Female Juvenile Society,1819
 Bethune School- 1849
 PICV- 35 schools for girls
 Charles Wood Dispatch, 1854- Need girl education
 Women's Medical Sercive- 1914-- Training nurses and midwives
 D K Karve- Indian Women's University 1916
 Lord Harding Medical College 1916 in Delhi 
 Sarojini Naido President of INC in 1925 and Governor of UP in 1947
 All India Women's Conference 1927, by Margarete Cousins

 Women's Organistation
  Sarla Devi Choudhary--Bhartiya Stree Mahamandal, 1910
  Rambai Ranade- Ladies Social Conference, under National Social Conference in 1904
  Pt. Rambai Saraswat- Arya Mahila Samaj 
  National Council of Women in India under International Women's Council in 1925 --Mehribai Tata


 Caste Chutiyap
 BRA- MAhad Satyagrah in 1927, All India Schedule caste federation, All India Depressed caste federation; Bahishkrit Hitkarni Sabha 1924- Educate,Agitate and Organise
 Gandhi- All India Harijan Sangh
 EV Ramaswamy Naickar- Self-Respect movement
 Sri-Narayan Guru- Temple Entry Movement- 1 Religion, 1 God, `1 caste[Sahadran Ayyapan- No religion, No god, No caste, Atheism Rules]


 RRR and BRAHMO SAMAJ
  i)Gift to Monotheists(1809)
 ii)Setup Atmiya Sabha in 1814 -- Monotheistic ideals of Vedanta+ Campaign against idoltry, rituals, chutiyap
iii)Precepts of Jesus(1820)
 iv)Brahmo Sabha(1828), later renamed BS. Studied Upanishads; No idol Worship allowed; Agenda- Purify Hinduism and preach Monotheism; 
  v)Raja Radhakant Deb's Dharma Sabha was started to oppose BS.
  vi)Took no stance on Karma and transmigration of Soul
 vii)Criticised Caste System
 viii)Established Vedanta college in 1825
 ix) Debendranath Tagore joined in 1842(Earlier Head of Tattvabodi Sabha); Later ICVC and AKDUTTA also joined.
  x)K C Sen joined in 1858--Expansion in ROI. But DT opposed some of his ideas- Inter-caste marriage, so he was kicked out in 1865.
 xi)So he founded BS of India in 1866, And TG's BS was now called Adi BS.
xii)In 1878 KCS's followers started Sadharan BS


 PRARTHNA SAMAJ
  i)Atmaram Pandurang(with help from KCS) in 1867. Before it there was paramhans sabha-A secret society.
 ii)MG Ranade joined in 1870. Other--Bhandarkar and Chandvarkar
iii)Attached to the Bhakti cult of Maharashtra
 iv)4 point agenda--i)No caste system ii)Women Education iii) Widow Remarriage iv)AGe of marriage
 

 YOUNG BENGAL MOVEMENT and HENRY VIVIAN DEROZIO
   i)1st Nationalist Poet of India
  ii)Demanded- Indians in Higher Services; Protection of Ryots from zamindars; Treatment of Indian labourers abroad; Freedom of press; 


 ICVC
  i)1850- Principal of sanskrit college; Opened sanskrit college to non-brahmins
 ii)Introduced western thoughts in college
iii) Widow remaariage; Child Marriage; polygamy

 BALSHASTRI JAMBHEKAR
   i)Marathi journal DARPAN in 1832
  ii)Bombay Native Library + Native improvement society 
 iii)Director of Colaba Observatory

 PARAMHANS MANDALI
   i)In 1949, by Pandurang and Durgaram. Ideology linked to Manav Dharam Sabha
  ii)Breaking Caste rules; Freedom of thoughts; Food cooked by lower castes


 SATYASHODHAK SAMAJ and JYOTIBA PHULE
   i)Caste domination and Brahminical Supremacy ; Founded in 1873
  ii)Spread of education among lower castes
 iii)Wrote---"Sarvajanik Satyadharm" and "Gulamgiri"
  iv)Opened girl's school at poona + Home for widows 
  v) Was awarded title of 'Mahatma'



  Gopalhari Deshmukh Lokhitwadi
    i)Wrote 'Prabhakar'. 
   ii)Reorganisation of Indian society on rationalist principles.
  iii)Gyan Prakash; Indu prakash



  SERVANTS OF INDIA SOCIETY
    i)GKG; MG Ranade in 1905
   ii)'Hitvadi' -1911. 
  iii)Never involved in political activities and INC.
   iv)Narayan Malhar Joshi, a follower of GKG, started SOCIAL SERVICE LEAGUE--organised schools, libraries etc.
         JOSHI also founded AITUC in 1920. 


   RAMKRISHNA MOVEMENT AND SWAMI VIVEKANANDA
     i)Founded in 1897 by SV. HQ-Belur near Calcutta.
    ii)Spreads Vedanta throughout world. 

   

   DAYANANDA SARASWATI and ARYA SAMAJ MOVEMENT
     i)Revivalist movement. First setup in Bombay in 1875, later HQ shifted to Lahore.
    ii)'Satya Prakash'. Slogan-' Back to the Vedas '.
   iii)A claseless and casteless India.  
    iv) Criticized Purans. 
     v)Intercaste marriage and equality of Women.
    

   BHARAT DHARAMA MAHAMANDAL
     i)Orthodox assholes
    ii)MMM

	 

STRUGGLE FOR INDEPENDENCE
   
    Pre-Congress Associations:- Demanded:- i) Admin reforms ii)Associations of Indian in admin iii)Spread of Education
   

   Bengal
     1)Bangbhasha Prakahika Sabha :- 1836, by Associates of RRR
     2)Zamindari Association/ Landholder's society:- 1st instance of Political activity and constitutional agitation
     3)Bengal British India Society:- 1843, To spread awareness about coditions of British India, Later merged with 2) to create British Indian Association
     4)British Indina Association:- 1851, Sent petitions to Britih Parliament :- 
                                             i)Seperate legislature
                                            ii)Seperation of Executive and judiciary
                                           iii)Reduction of salaries                             (Partially accepted in Charter act 1853)
                                            iv)Abolition of stamp duty, salt duty
       
     5)East India Association:- 1866, By Dadabhai Naoroji in london
     6)Indian League:- 1875, Sisir Kumar Ghosh to stimulate sense of Nationalism in Indians.
     7)Indian Association of Calcutta/Indian national Association:- Superceded 6), in 1876 by Surendranath banerjee and Anand Mohan Bose(Fed up with British India Association--Pro-landlord)
                i)Protested against reduction of age limit in 1877
               ii)Simultaneius holding of civil service exam and Indianisation of Admin. 
              iii)Campaign against Arms act and Vernacular press act
               iv)All India conference in 1883, Merged with INC in 1886.
     
    
   Bombay
     1)Poona Sarvajanik sabha:- 1867, MG Ranade, to act as bridge bw gov and people.
     2)Bombay Presidency Association:- 1885, B.Tyabji, P.Mehta, K.T.telang
   
   Madras 
     1)Madras Mahajan Sabha:- 1884, M.VeerRaghavChari, B.Subu.Iyer and P.Anand.Charlu


    

INDIAN NATIONAL CONGRESS
    1st Session:- 1885, Sanskrit College, Bombay, 72 Delgates, President=WC Bonerjee
    Presidents:- DadaBhai(3), B.Tyabji, P.Mehta, P.AnandCharlu, SN Banerjee, RC Dutt, AM BOSE, GKG
    1st women Graduate of Calcutta Uni, Kadambini Ganguly addressed the session.
    
    Objectives:- 
       i)Found a Democratic Nationalist Movement
      ii)Politicise and politically educate people
     iii)Establish HQ for movement
      iv)Promote friendly relation bw Nationalists from all part of India.
       v)Develop and promote Anti Colonial nationalist Ideology
      vi)Unify people over common economic and political programme
     vii)Develop feeling of national unity
    viii)Promote and Nurture Indian Nationhood


     Era Of Moderates(1885-1905)
             i)Leaders:- Dada, Mehta, Wacha, Bonnerjee, Banerje
            ii)Believed in Liberalism, and moderate politics. Consti. Agitation within confine of law.	
           iii)British Committee of INC organised in London in 1899
            iv)Economic Critique:- Dada, Dutt, Wacha---"Drain Theory"
             v)Demand of Self-Gov on lines of Aus and Canada- 	Dada,GKG,Tilak
            vi)Didn't- Widened the base; Never included masses and women, never advocated Voting for all
           vii)United Indian Patriotic Association- Syed Ahmed Khan and Raja Shiv Prasad singh of Benaras

     Era of Militant Nationalism(1905-1909)
              i)Leaders:- ( Raj Narain Bose, A K Dutta, Aurobindo Ghosh, Bipin Chandra Pal ) in Bengal; ( Chipunkar, Tilak ) in Maharashtra; Lala in Punjab
             
          Swadeshi Movement 
            i)Leaders:- Surendranath banerjee, KK MItra and prithwishchandra Ray
           ii)Newspapers:- Hitbadi, Sanjeevani, BEngalee
          iii)Partition plan announced in July 1905. 
           iv)Calullta Townhall, August--Boycott(Manchester clothes and liverpool salt) resolution was adopted , Swadeshi movement proclaimed formally. 
            v)Spread to Maharashtra- Tilak; Punjab-Lala + Ajit singh; Delhi- Syed Haider Rajal; Madras- Chidambram Pillai
           vi)Congress meeting 1905, Chaired by GKG---i)Condemed partition ii)Support anti-partion and swadeshi movement
          vii)Congress meeting 1906, Chaired by Dada--i)Goal of INC-Self Government/Swaraj like other colonies 
         viii)Congress meeting 1907, chaired by 
           ix)'Samitis'- Volunteere committees, Ex- 'Swadeshi bandhab commiittee by A K Dutta' ; 'Swadeshi Sangam' in Madras by Chidambram Pillai and Subramanian Siva
            x)Bengal National College was setup inspired by Tagore's Shantiniketan; In 1905 National Council on Education was setup; Bengal Institute of Tech
           xi)Swadeshi Steam Navigation Company- C.Pillai; 
          xii)Subrimaniam Bharti wrote 'Sudesh Geetham' 














Pandita Gandbai : 1857 ke revolt me, kisi sepoy ne josh me aake iski maa chod ti thi. Chodne wala pandti tha, or chudwabe wali Gaand. Isliye, agle saal jo bachhi paida hui uska naam Pandita Gandbai rakh diya gaya. 



   Gandbai, Apne aap ko Aryan samjhti thi, isliye, 1882 me Poona aakar, isne Aryan Mahila Samaj start kiya.
   
      Ye yahi nahi ruki, isne Marathi me a book publish kar daali---> Stree Dharma Niti
      
         Gandbai, ek lesbian thi, isliye, Pehle isne Aryan mahilao ko pataya, Fir gandi gandi keetabe likhi, fir is se bhi pet nahi bhara, to Mukti sadan naam ka kotha khol dala, jaha upper caste widows aake pussy rub karti thi. 







1836 me Rammohun Roy ke kuch associates ko uski ek Briitsh aadmi saath Gaypanti ka pata chal gaya, to wo bolte, Bokachoda, ammi to Bongali Education promote karis, To Aami Bangabhasha Prakasika Sabha start karis. 

10 saal baad, wo British bhadwa, Badi besharmi ke saath, Bengal British India Society start karta hai. 





1875 me Sisir Kumar Ghosh ne sisakte hua kaha, Oh my Ghosh, I want to Join Inidian League. 

   To shambhu Chandra Mukherjee or Kalinath Das bole, haan lekin Konsi Indian League. 
   
      To sisir Kumar Gosh ne bola----- Indian League. 
      
      
      
      






1639 me Fort St George bana

1668 me Bombay mil gaya EIC ko

1690 me Job Charnok ne 3 gaanv khareede--> Sutanati, Govindpur and Kaliatta---> Ye thode saalo me Calcutta Ban gaya.  Job charnok ne isye fortify kiya, or Fort St William naam de diya, William walle...Nahi King William III ke upar. 





   Yaad karo ya Gand Marwao, Your wish asshole. 
   
   
   
   
 Dupleix pehla European tha, jisne Indians ko gori chut deni shuru ki thi. Iski dekha dekh, angrezo ne bhi Clive ke time se hi Indians ko Gori European chut baantni shuru kar di thi.   

   Is chut dene ke arrangement ko Subsidiary alliance kehte the. 
   
      Pehle Indian chutiya, jo is chut ke jaal me fasa wo tha Awadh ka Nawab, Chodu Shaah 1765 me.   Chut ke badle paisa. Bas. 
      
        Lekin, Cornwallis the Coward, 1787 me Chodu shaah ko bolta, "Dekho nawab, Ab Chut ke bade, paisa to dena hoga hi, saath saath tumhare Foreign relations bhi hum dictate karega".
        
        Cornwallis the Coward, harami, European CHut ke thaharne ke bahane, puri territory hi hadap liya karta tha.  

 
   Ye chut lene dene ka dhanda, 4 stages me evolve hua : 
   
   
     1st Stage : War ladne ke liye, Rande supply karte the local rulers ko, jo inke friends the. 
     
     2nd Stage : Dono Saath milke, ek common cause ke liye, ladai karte the, Jisme English rande bhi hoti thi, or local rande bhi. 
     
     3rd Stage : Local Rulers ko bol dete the, ki tumhari rando me dum nahi hai, hamare English officers ke under hum train karke apni army se ladenge. Tum bas paisa do, tumhara defence hum karenge. 
     
     4th Stage : Kaafi paisa mange the, or jab state paisa nahi de pata tha, to Angrej aake, khule me chudai shuru kar deta tha, or bolta tha, ki ab ye hamara zammen hai. 
     
     
     
  'Sidney J. Owen naam ke bande ne bola tha ki, Wellesley The Fuckboy ne British Empire in India ko British Empire of India bana diya. Supreme power bana diya, Defence of India ab company ka responsibility hai, Loda lahsun'.
  
  
  Awadh ke dekha, dekh sab Indian Chode, Gori chut ke nashe me dhut, ek ek kar apni gaand Angrezo ko dene lage. 
  
     i) Hyderabas ka tharki nizam, 1798 tak khudko rok paya, FIr bola, Aaaaaah, Mujhe bhi gori chut chahiye, Chodu shaah ki tarah. 
     
    ii) Mysore ka ruler, jo Tipu ke marte hi bana tha, wo saal ek saaal bhi wait nahi kar paya or 1799 me hi Subsidiary alliance sign kar baitha. 
    
   iii) Mysore wale ke dekhi dekhi, Uska padosi, ruler, Tanjore wala bhi gori rande khareed laya, usi saal. 
   
    iv) Awadh ka ek naya nawab aaya, wo Saala bhi 1801 me Gori chut ka deewana ho gaya. 
    
     v) 1801 me, Hindu Rashtra ka sapna dekhne wale Maratha Peshwa ne bhi bola, Show Bobs and Vagene
     
    vi) Sindhia, ne 1804 me haar mani
    
   vii) 1818 ko pata nahi kya tharak chadi, ki sab Rajput rulers ne(Jodhpur, Jaipur, Macheri, Bundi, Bharatpur) ne bhi Gori chut ke nashe me apni gand marwa li.   (Tum to aise nahi the, Rajput bros). 
   
  viii) Sabse aakhri, Maratha, Holkar, Rajputs ko dekh pagal ho gaya, or Gori rande pakad laya, or Pant kholkar bola, Mujhe Subsidiary alliance kubul hai, baby. 
  
  
         
     
     
  1848 me Dalhousie Sir, aaye. In bhaisaab ko kuch jyada hi shok tha Indian territories chin ne ka. Isliye, inhone, Pehle se hi chali aa rahi, Doctrine of Lapse Policy ka ji bhar ke use kiya, or Napunsak Rulers ki territories hathiya li. 
  
           
        i) 1848 Sabse pehle Satara ko Khatra hua, jab Napunsak raja Muthmaru, chut marna hi bhul gaya. 
        
       ii) Agle saal, Sambhalpur ka raja, jo Sambhalkar Chudai karne ke chakar me,kabhi condom ke bina chadha hi nahi apni wife pe, or mar gaya bina aulad ke.   
     
      iii) 1850 me, Lund Bhagat, Half Century maar, mar gaya. Ye Bhagat tha kisi guru ka, jisne bola tha ki tu 50 saal tak chudai nahi kar sakta. 
      
       iv) Lund Bhagat ki mot ki khabar sun, Udaipur ke raja ne apna lund kaat liya, kyunki wahi uska Guru tha. Isliye, wo bhi bina Bacche paida kiya mar gaya. 1850
       
        v) 1854, me Nagpur ke raja, jiska Naag, kabhi jaga hi nahi, bina kisi aulaad ke Naag devta ki puja karte karte mar gaya. 
        
       vi) 1855 me Jhansi ki rani ka pati, randi ko chod ta chod ta mar gaya. Usne kabhi, Jhansi ki rani ki chut nahi mari thi, kyunki Jhani ki rani apni jhant nahi kat ti thi. 
        
      vii) Aakhi kaar, 1856 me Awadh ke Nawab Wajid Luli Ali Shaah ke bete ke bete ko bhi hata diya, gaya on the grounds of Mal-administration. Not because, uske bachhe nahi the. Uske to 20-30 bachee the. 
     
     
     
     
     
     1801 me, Kisi British chode ne jaake , Gorakhpur me peshab kar diya, or bola, Hai koi Nepali maa ka loda, jo mujhe rok ke dikhaye. 
     
     Ye sunkar, Gorkhas ki gaand me aag lag gayi. Lekin unhone, uspar seedha attack nahi kar diya. Unhone agle 15 saal planning ki, or Lord Hastings ke time Butwal or Sheoraj naam ki jagah par ek saath jakar, mut nahi balki tati kar di.  Jiske baad angrezo ne unki gand mar di, to 1816 me Nepalis ne Angrezo ke saath, Treaty of Sagauli sign kar li. 
     
         - India ko mili, Garhwal and Kumaon ki rande. Or Nepalis ne Terai ki rando ko dekh, muth marna bhi band kar diay. 
         - Nepalis, ne Sikkim me jo kotha, khola tha, wo bhi band kar diya, 
         - Brits, ne Shimal, Nainital or Mussoorie me naye kothe khole. 
         - Gurkha logo ko gurad laga diya. 
         
     	British Empire Reached HImalayas.     
          
     
   Iske baad, kisi chode ne aake, Britishers ke kaan bhar diye, ki BC tum yaha chudai me lage ho, or Udhar, French aake Myanmar par kabja karna wale hain.    
     
     Bas, ye sunte hi British Chode, Army leke pahonch gaye or Arakan and Manipur par kabja kar liya. 
     1824 me fir, unhone Rangoon pe kabja kar liya. Ava Addams ki maa ke naam pe bani capital, ava se bas 72 km door the. 
     
       Isliye, Burma ke raja ki fat gayi, or usne 1826 me Treaty of Yandaboo sign karli. 
     
          i) 1 crore rupees
         ii) Manipur, Independent and shiieeet
        iii) We got Arakan and Tenasserim
         iv) Assam, Cachar and Jaintia is not Burmese Clay
          v) British resident will fuck Ava
          
     
     
    Lekin, Dalhousie Sir, Indian hi nahi, Burmese territories ke bhi bhuke the. Isliye, Timber ke nashe me 1852 ko Burma ke pegu par chadh dode, ko unka akela coastal area tha.  
     
     
     Is baar bhi French lode lene aa gaye the waha, kuch rail wail ki baate bhi chal rahi thi Thibaw raja ke saath. 
     
     1885 me Dufferin Choda, Pure Burma par kabja kar liya. 
     
     
     
     
     
     
   1826 me kuch British log, Assam ghumne aaye. waha unhe, koi Chinki pasand aa gayi. Isliye, Un saalo ne Assam par hi kabja kar liya, taaki unhe bohot saari Chinki chut mile.   
     
    Assamese Rande chod chodke, jab british bore hue to unhone, Bhutanese rande chodne ke liye, 1865 me Assam ki or jaane wale, sab passes pe kabja kar liya.   Ye unhone, Tea Gardens banaye, or khub bhutanese rande la lake chodi. 
    
     
     
     British logo ki Russians se hamesha se hi fat ti aayi hai. 
     1828 me Treaty of Turkomanchai sign hone ke baad, British ki gaand me bhukamp aa gaya ye soch ki, BC ab unke haath se India nikal ke Vodka peene wale janwaro ke haath lagne wala hai. 
     Isilye, wo Ek Scientific Frontier ki talash me lag gaye. 
     Iske liye, unhe NW wale passes apne under chahiye the, jiske liye wo chahte the, Afghanistan par koi aisa banda baithayen, jo unki gaand chate. 
     
     
     1836 me Auckland Apni Scheme leke aaya---> Forward Policy ki--> Russia se bachne ke liye, padosi desho se treaty karo, ya unpar kabja kardo. 
     
       Afghanistan ka Emir, Dost mohammad bhi chahta tha, British rande, lekin Rando se jyada use pyara tha, Peshawar city, ko Sikho ke under tha. Lekin, British sikho se lode lene ko abhi tayyar nahi the. 
       
       Isliye, Dost, chala gaya Russia or Peria ki godi me.  Ye dekh ke British ki gaand me aag lag gayi, or Unhone Tripartite Treaty(1838) Sign kar li, Sikh or Shah Shuja ke saath. 
     
          Shah Shuja, ek bhadwa tha, jise 1808 me Afghanio ne gand pe laat maar ke baga diya tha. Tabse so Ludhiyana me rehta tha, as a British Pensioner. 
          
          Treaty ke hisab se, Sikho ki madad se is bhadwe ko Afghan ruler banya jayega. Or ye bhadwa Sikho or British ki gand chatega. Or ye bhadwa Sindhi Amirs ki jameeno par bhi adheekar nahi jamayega. 
          Or saath Saath, Ye bhadwa, Ranjit singh ke Indus River ke Right bank ki saari territories par claim ko accept karega. 
     
       Iske baad, 1838 me 1st Afghan war start hua.  1840 me Dost Mohammad ne surrender kar diya or Bhadwa, Amir ban gaya. Lekin, agle hi saal Afghanio ne uske gote kaat diye, or Dost wapas aa gaya. Or brits bhaag gaye. 
        Agle, saal fir wapas aaye, lekin Dost ko hi ruler maan liya. Chutiye, saale, 20 hazar bande marwa diye. 
     
     1st Afghan war me hue nuksaan se, Brits ki fat gayi. Or John Lawrence of India(1864-69) ne Policy of Masterly Inactivity adopt ki. 
           - Dost mar gaya, 1863 me. Iske baad waha Shit show start hua succession ka, lekin ispar bhi Lawrence ne apna lund nahi adaya. 
           - Sher Ali, jab amir ban gaya, to Lawrence ne use love letters likhe. 



      1876 me appoint hue, Maha Bakchod, Lord Lytton Lundwale, ne Policy of Proud Reserve adopt ki. ----> Ye choda bhi scientific frontiers or Spheres of influence ke maya jaal me ulajh gaya. 


           Lytton Lundwale, Chahta tha, ki Sher ali se treaty kar le. Lekin Sher Ali, ajad panchi tha. Usne Kabul me British Envoy rakhne se bhi mana kar diya. Lekin, harami ne Russin Envoy allow kar diya tha. Ye sunke, Lytton Lundwale, ki gaand me aag lag gayi, or wo Chadh doda, Afghanistan par, army leke. 
           
            2nd Afghan war--> Sher Ali, chuhe ki tarah bhaad gaya. Or Brits ne Yakub khan, Sher ke bete, se treaty of Gandamak sign kar li :
            
                                                                                                             - Amir, GoI ki advice se foreign policy chalayega. 
                                                                                                             - Permanent British Resident at kabul
                                                                                                             - GoI Amir, ko Support karegi, against foreign invasion
                                                                                                             - Annual Subsidy milegi Yakub ko
                                                                                                             
                                     Lekin afghan janwar kaha sudharne wale the. Unhone Yakub ki maa chod di. Isliye, Brits ne dobara Kabul par kabja kar liya. 

                                     Lytton Lundwale, to itna guusa ho gaya, ko wo Aghansitan ke tukde karne ki sochne laga. 
 
                                     Lekin, Ripon bhai, ne ye Idea ke upar peshab kar diya, or Afghanistan ko as a buffer state use karna start kar diya. k                                                                               

  
       1893 me Durrand Agreement sign hua.  Lekin, iske baad bhi Tribal uprising hoti rahi, jiske liye, Brits ne Chitral me ek permanent British Garrison bhi estalish kiya, to guard Malakand pass. 
       
       
       Curzon Badelundwale, jo viceoroy tha 1899 or 1905 ke beech, ne Withdrawal and Concentrate naam ki policy adopt ki. Troops ne advance posts abandon kar di. Inki jagah, locally trianed tribals ko duty de di, to maintain peace. 

          Isne, NWFP create kiya, Jo Directly GoI ke under tha (is se pehle ye area, Lt. Gov of Punjab ke under tha). 
          
          Curzon ki policies se North West frontier peacefull ho gaya. 







  1904 me Curzon gandu, ki Russians ki photos dekh ke fat gayi, jisme wo Tibetan babes ko chod rahe the. Curzon, ne isliye, Younghusban ko kuch gorkhe deke bola, jao or mere liye, Tibetan Bitches laao. 

      Chode, ne jaake hawa me Treaty of Lahasa sign kar li, jis se 
      
         - We got Chumbi valley. 
         - Tibet ko bola, sikkim se dur rahe
         - Foreign affairs par thoda hamse puch wuch liya karo. 
         
         






  South India me Nayak(Rulers), poligars ko Palayam de deta tha-> Group of few villages, jiske badle me Poligars, Military services ya Tributes diya karte the. 

    Ye Poligar log, or North ke Zamindars, ki British rule ki wajah se maa chud gayi thi.    Inke competition me naye log aa gaye the--> Brit Officials, Merchants, Money Lenders etc. 


     Yahi, log, Indian Handicrafts industry ko patronise karte the, or inki maa chudne se Artisans wagarh ke bhi lode lag gaye. 
     
     Ye log, Pandit, Maulvi type chodo ko bhi paise diya karte the, Matlab Priestly class ki bhi maa chud gayi. 



  Peasant Uprisings: 

      1) Sanyasi Revolt (1763- 1800)
      
       1770 me bhayanak akaal pada, Eastern India me.  Lekin, British chode, tax mangne aa jaate the. Isliye, Ye sanyasi log, jo pehle peasants hua karte the, teer bhaale leke, garadn utarne lag gaye. Inki dekha dekh, Chote zamindar, gauthi log or disbanded soldiers bhi kud pade.  Company ki factories par attack kar diya BC. 
      
            Warren Hastings, 1st Governnor ne, 1st Civil Uprising ki maa chod di.  


          Hindu or Musallla ekta dikhayi di. Sanyansis don't give a rat's ass about religion, they are fucking sanyasis for crying out loud. 


        Leader log : Manju Mami Shah, Chirag Ali Lampwale, Musa Shah CHuhakhor, Jai Bhawani Pathak and Debby Chutkirani. 
        
          Debby Chutkirani, bra or panty me lada karti thi, isi photo khinch, Bankim Chandra Chattopadhyay ne Anand liye, or logo ko bhi Anand dene ke liye, Anandmath naam ki nudie mag me photos publish kardi. 
          Debby, Sanyasi logo se chudai ka bhi anand leti thi. 

           Bankim, sala itna bada fan ho gaya tha Debby ka, ki usne Debby Chutkirani naam ki novel hi likh daali, jisme wo debby ke saath milke Angrejo ki factories jalata hai, or fir sanyasi log ke saamne debby ki chut marta hai. 
                
                
                
                
   2) Mindanpore and Dalbhum Revolt(1766-74)
   
   
   1760 me Brits ne Mindanpore par kabja kar liya,  or 1772 me yaha Naya land revenue system le aaye. Jis se Ryots or Brits ke bich, muka laat shuru hua, to saale waha ke zamindar log, apne dharam ke ulat jaakar, British ka saath dene ki jagah, Ryots ka saath dene lage. 
   
      Mindanpore ke west me Jungle Mahal me rehne wale bohot saare zamindar, daanti hathoda lekar aa gaye, or Brits ko maa ki gali dene lage. 
       
        1880s tak, Brits ne Mindanpore ka Tatti nikaal diya. 
      
      
        Leader Log : Dum Lagao Damodar Shah and Jagannath Dalla  Mindanpore wale. 
        
        

  3)  Moamaris Revolt(1769-99)
  
      1769 me Ahom Rajas ke against khade ho gaye Maria Sharapova ke fans, Moa-Maria.    Ye neech jaat ke the, or Aniruddh Deva ki puja karte the, ko inhe Wimbeldon ke live matches dikhata tha. 

             Ye chahte the, Assam me bhi Tennis ka tournament karwaye jaate, jis se Maria Sharapova Assam aa sake. 
             Ye Bangladesh ke Jorhat or Rangpur me active the. 
             
         In Maria FanBois se nipatne ke liye Ahom raja ne Brits se madad mangi. 

        In Fanbois ne Ahom kingdom ko andar se itna khokhla kar diya, ki Ahom kingdom, Burma ke under aa gaya or fir Brits ne batti deke gand mar di, Assam ki. 

       (Dukh ki baat ye hai, ki Maria Sharapova, aaj tak Assam nahi gayi hai)


     
    4) Civil Uprising in Gorakhpur, Basti and Bahraich(1781)
    
     Jab, British log, Mysore or Marathas se lode, lene lage, to unge dhan ki awashakta padi. To Warren hastings ne kuch British chode pakde or unhe, Bihar jakar Revenue Farmer yani Izaradars bankar, paisa kamane ko bola. 
    
       Iske liye, usne Alexander Hanny The Faggot ki madad li, jisne 1778 me Gorakhpur or Bahraich ka izara le liya. 
       
       
       Lekin, apne ilake me ek faggot ke izaradar ban jaane ki khabar sunte hi Bihari revolt par utar aaye, or unhone Hanny the Faggot ke subordinates ki gardane utar di. 
       
       Jiske baad, Hanny the Faggot ko waha se wapas bula liya gaya. Hanny iske baad, Bengal me machhi vyapari ban gaya, or 1 din badi machli bechte bechte uski gaand se 2 african carp nikal aayi, jiski wajah se wo bimar pad gaya. 
       
    
    
    5)  Viziangaram ke raja ka revolt (1794)    


     
         Brits ne Viziangaram ke Chutiye raja , Anand Raju ko chutiya banakar, Use apne saath milkar, French log ko Northern Circars se bhaga diya. 
         
         Iske baad Brits ne Chutiye raja Anand Raju ka chutiya kaat diya, or Viziangaram se Rs 3 lakh mangne lage or Anand Raju ke marne ke baad jo banda aaya use bola ki SaalA apni troops disband kar. 
         
         Ye sunke, Raja tilmila gaya, or usne Revolt kar diya.   Or 1793 me Padmanabham(Vishakhapatnam) me ladte ladte mar gaya(RiP bro)



   6)  Bednur ke Dhundia ka Revolt (1799-1800)
   
         Dhundia, ek Maratha leader the Mysore ka, jisne Tipu Sultan ka lemon chus liya tha, or Islam me convert ho gaya tha. 

         Is chode, ne Tipu ke marne ke baad, bande ikathe kiye, or apne liye, alag se territory carve out kar li. 
         
         Ye choda, fir Brits se bachta bachta Maratha area me pahonch gaya, or waha logo ko bhadkane laga. 
         
         1800 me Wellesley The Fuckboy ne iska Dhaniya bana diya. 
 
 
 
  7) Kerala Varma Pazhassi Raja ke randaap(1797, 1800-05)
  
  
     Ye, Malabar region ke Kottayam region ka sher tha.  Isne, Brits se pehle Hyder Ali or Tipu Sultan se bhi lode liye the. 
     
     
     3rd Mysore war ke time(1790-92), Brits ne bola, BC ye to hamara area hai. Or Kerala Varama ke nephew ki taraf ishara karte hue bola, ye yaha ka raja hai. Or fir us chutiye ko bohot saara paisa dene ko bola, or wo chutiya raji bhi ho gaya power ke nashe me. Lekin usne itna rent wasoola logo se, ki log Kerala Varma ke rule ko yaad karne lage, or 1793 me Kerala Varma Pazhasi raja ke under revolt start ho gaya.  BC, is bhai ne Gureilla Warfare start kar diya.   
     
       1797 me peace treaty sign hui.  Lekin, 1800 me waynad ko lekar dispute start ho gaya.  
     
     
          Raja ne Nairs ki badi force ikatthi ki, jise Mappilas or Pathan log ka bhi support tha, or 1805 me ladte ladte shaheed ho gaya(RiP bro)
          
          
          
     
   8) Awadh ka Civil Rebellion (1799)
   
         Wazir ali khan, jo khud brits ka lund chus ke Awadh ka 4th Nawab bana, ko usi ke uncle Saadat Ali khan ne Brits ka lund chus ke hata diya. 
         
         
          Wazir ali khan ne gusse me aakar, George Fredrick Cherry ke beech bazzar me cheery utar di.   Is incident ko "Massacre of Benaras" kehte hain.    Fir isne, 1000 bande ikathe kiye, or Brits se lode lene...Maa chud gayi.   
     
     
        Wazir ali, gand bachata hua, Jaipur pahonch gaya.  Waha se use extradite kar, Fort Williams,Calcutta me bharti kar diya gaya. 
     
     
     
   9) Ganjam and Gumsur ka Uprisin (1800, 1835-37)
   
        Northern Circars, me Strikara Bhanj jaise ghinone naam ke zamindar ne, revenue dene se mana kar diya.  Iske piche, Jlani Deo or Jagannath Deo bhi kud pade.    
     
  
      Strikara ke baad, uske ladke, Dhananjay The 1st ne revolt kar diya, 1830 me. or 1835 ladte ladte shaheed ho gaya (RiP Bro)
      
      
      
  10) Palamau ki Uprising (1800-02) 
  
      1800 me ek Chero Chief, Bhukhan Singh(BC kya naam hai, Bhu khan Singh), utar gaya maidan me. 
      
        
        Colonel jones ne 2 saal me Bhukhan ki Dukhan band kardi. 
        
        
            
  11) Poligar's Revolt (1795-1805) :
  
  
      Madurai, North Arcotm Sivagiri, Tinneveli ke poligars kud pade.  Ye problem to 1781 me Arcot ke Nawab ke chutiyaap ki wajah se hi start ho gayi thi. 


      -Katta-bommann Nayakan (BC, Katta Bow Man) ne 1795 se 1799 tak lead kiya. Yahi hai Veerpandiay Kottabomman, jisne brits ko harya tha. Brits ne iski firoti de daali, jiske baad bada revolt start ho gaya poligars ka. 


      Katta, Pudukottai ke jungalo me baag gaya. Lekin, Pudukottai ke maha chutiye raja, ne Katta Bow man bhai, ko Brits ke hawale kar diya.  
      
        Brits ne Katta or uske ek mate, Sunramania Pillai ko latka diya(RiP Guys), or ek Sundar Panian naam ke bande ko to tadpa tadpake mara. 

          Brits ne baaki Poligars ko pakad ke jail me band kar diya. 
          
          
      Lekin wo bhaag gaye jail tod ke, 1801 me 2nd phase of revolt start ho gya, and this time it was personal and very very bloody.     

    In bhaiyo ne Tuticorin par hi kabja kar liya. 


   1805 tak, rebellion suprress ho gaya. 
   
   
   
   
   12) Bhiwani ki uprising (1809) 
   
   
        Ye to apne jaat bhaiyo ne kiya tha. 
        
        
   13) Diwan Velu Thampi ka revolt(1808-1809)
   
            

        Travancore par Subsidiary ALliance ki wajah se aaya bhari dawab. Under , our very own Wellesly the Fuckboy, in 1805. 


       Or company wale, local affairs me lode lene lage, to velu Thamp bola, Aata majhi satakli re. 
   

       Bhai, ne Kundara naam ki jagah par, Nair troops ikatthe kiya, or KUNDARA PROCLAMATION ki. 
       
        Lekin, fattu maharaja of Travancore ne fully support nahi kiya. 
        
        Velu Bhai ne Aatma Hatya kar li(RiP Bro). 



   14) Bundelkhan me disturbances (1808-12)
   
       Bundelkhand, Brits ke hatthe laga tha, 2nd Anglo Maratha war ke time. Ise fir Bengal Presidency ka part bana diya gaya. 



     AjayGarh fort ke killedar, Lakshman Dawa ne Brits ke thode time maje liye. 
     
     Iske baad, Darya singh shuru ho gaya. 
     
     Lekin, sabse serious kaand kiye, Gopal Singh naam ke bande ne. 
     
     Gopal ko rokne ke liye, Brits ne Bundelkhand ke hereditary chiefs ke saath Ikarnamahs naam ke Contractual obligations sign kawaye. 



  15) Orissia wala ParlaKimedia Outbreak(1813-34)
  
      Narayn Deo ki kisi baat pe lund le liya. 
      
        

  16) Kutch Rebellion (1816- 1832) 
  
     
          Raja Bharmal II, ne Arab or Nigga Troops ikathe kar, Brits se lode lene shuru kar diye. 


  17) Bareilly ki Risisng(1816)
  
      Mufti Muhaamad Aiwaz ko Awaz aayi, Bareilly me Jihad karne ki. 



 18) Hathras (1817) 
 
    Mulle ki kahani sunke, Dayaram ne bhi lode le liye. 
    
    
    
 19) Paika Rebellion(1817)
 
 
     Odisha ki landed milita---> Inhe, inki services ke liiye, Rent free land mila karti thi. 


    Ye hereditary policing functions bhi kiya karte the. 
    
    
    Brits ne 1803 me Khudra ke raja ki maa chod di, jis se Paiks ki bhi maa chud gayi, 

    Or jo Land Revenue policy laaye brits + Salt Duty + Abolition of Cowrie currency = Log bhi naaraz. 
    
    

        Bakshi Jagabandhu Bidyadhar, ne lead kiya revolt, 1817 me. 

       1825 me Bakshi Paik pakda gaya. 



  

  20) Ahom Revolt ( 1828) 
  
      
          
       Brits ne 1st Burna war ke baad apni aukat dikha di, to Ahom log kud pade, under the leadership of Gomdhar Konwar. 
       
       
         Brits, ne fir dar ke maare, upper assam ka kuch part, Maharaja Purandar Singh ko lota diya. 



  21) Surat Salt Agitation(1840s) 
  
      Pehle to Salt duty badhane par. 
      Fir, Bengal Standart Weights and measures introduce karne par. 
      
      
      Boycott and Passive resistance, koi khun kharaba nahi. 



  22) Kohlapur ke Gadkari, kud pade, 1844 me. 
  
  
  23) Wahabi Revolt  : Pehle Sikh Empire ke against, uske baad 1849 me Brits ke against. 
  
  
  24) Haye ni Tera Kuka Kuka Kuka Movement :- 1840 me Bhagat Jawahar Mal (a.k.a Sian Saheb) ke under. 
  
      Bhagat ke baad, Baba Ram singh kud pada. Ye wo Namdhari sect wala choda tha. 
  
     Inhone, Swadeshi or Non-cooperation ka naara lagaya tha sabse pehle. 
  
  
       1872 me, Raam singh ko Rangoon bhej diya gaya. 
  
  
  
  
  25) Narkelberia Uprising : Mir Nathar Ali/ Titu Mir ne Mullo ko bhadka diya, Hindu landlords ke against.   Ye baad me Wahabi se mil gaye. 
  
  26) Pagal Panthis : Bengal ke Mymensign District ke Hajong and Garo Tribes ka Semi-Religious movement. 
   
          Karam Shah naam ke bande ne start kiya. Iske baad, iske bete Tipu ne lode liye.   
          
           
           1825-1835, me oppressive zamindars ke against. 
  
  
  27) Faraizi Revolt :- Dadu Mian ne 1838-1857 tak. Ye saale bhi Wahabi se mil gaye. 
  
  
  
  
     
                    1857 revolt me peasant log, bas Western UP me active the. 
                    Revolt ke baad, inke or bhi lode lag, gaye, jab british ne Zamindaro ko support karna shuru kar diya. 
                    Ex : Bengal Rent Act, 1859 se Taluqdars ko to zameen wapas mil gayi, lekin peasants ke haath, bas unka loda aaya. 
  
  
  
  
  
  
 Mainland ke  Tribal Movements: 
  
  
     1) Pahariya's Rebellion : Raj Mahal pahadio ke Pahariyas ne 1778 me revolt kar diya. 
     
        Brits ne inke area ko Damni-kol area declare kiya, peace lane ke liye. 
  
  
  
  
    2) Chaur Uprising : Mindanpore ke Jungle mahal ke Chaur logo ne hathiyar utha liye, 1766- 1772 ke beech. or Ek baar fir, bw 1795-1816. 
  
       Durjan Singh sabse Durjan chor tha inme se, 1798 me lode liye the isne. 
  
  
          Kuch, pussy historians ko Chaur term pasand nahi hai, isliye wo ise Jungle Mahal ka revolt bhi bolte hain. 
  
  
  
    3) Kol Mutiny(1831) 
    
       Chotanagpur ke area wale.      1831 me outsiders ko land transfer kar dene ki wajah se. 
  
  
        Buddhe Bhagat ki leadership me inhone 1000 se jyada outsiders ko jala dala. 
        
        
        
    4) Ho and Munda Uprising(1820-1837) 
    
    
         Parahat ke Raja ne Ho log, ko bhadkaya, Singhbhum ki occupation ke against(Jo jharkhand me hai) 
         
        Ye wala revolt, 1827 tak chala. 
        
        Iske baad, Chotanagpur ke Mundas kud pade, revenue policy ke against. 
        
        
        
        Munda ek baar fir, 1900 ke aaspaas, Birsa Munda ke under josh me aa gaye. 
        
        Is period ko Ulgulan kehte hain. 1860-1920 ke beech. 
        
         Money lenders, zamindars, forest contractors, Doraemon, BC kisi ko nahi chora, sab khu-khaan kar ta.     
  
  
  
  
   5) Santhal Rebellion (1855-56) 
   
   Bihar ke Rajmahal Hills par rehne wale, Santhals, Zamindars ke against kud pade.   Baad me ye Anti-british ban gaya, jab ye zamindars or moneylenders Police bula laye. 
  
  
     Sidhu and Kanhu, 2 bhaio ke under Autonomous zone bana liya inhone, Bhagalpur or Rajmahal ke beech ke area me. 
     
     1856 me inki maa chud gayi. 
  
  
  
  6) Khond Uprising(1837-56) 
  
  
      Odisha se Vishakhapatnam tak hilly areas me rehte hain khond log. 
      
      Chakra Bisoi ne inhe chutiya banakar, Human Sacrifice ke roke jaane par, British se lode le liye. 
  
  
  
  7) Koya Revolt
  
      Andhra ke Eastern Godavari Tracts me rehne wale Koya, 1879 me Tomma Sora ke under kud pade.       Tomm Sara Koya log, Hamesha hamari juuti ke neech....
  Tribal Revolts 
   
   
   
   
   
  8) Bhil Uprising : 
  
         
              Western Ghats wale. 1817-19 ke beech, due to famine. 
              
              Baad me, Rajasthan ke Bhil logo ko Govind Guru naam ke bande be bhadka diya. 
              
              
  9) Koli : 
  
     Ye bhil logo ke padosi hote hain. 1844-48 ke beech inhe bhi masti chadh gayi.             
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  10) Ramosi Rising : 
  
      WEstern Ghats ki hills par rehte hain Ramosi.  Ye marathas ke under kaam karte the, or jab marathas ke lode lage, to inke bhi lag gaye. 
      
      
      Inhe, 1822 ne Chittur Singh naam ke bande ne chutiya banaya. 
      
      Fir 2-3 saal baad, Umaji Naik of Poona naam ke bande ne chutiya kaata. 
      
      
      
      
      
   North East ke Tribal Movements : 
   
   
    2
   1) Khasi Uprising :    Tirath Singh naam ke jungli ke under, Khasi, Garo, Sampati ke chacha ke ladke, Khampati and Singhphos organise ho gaye, outsiders ke khilaf(Jinhe railway tracks bichane ke liye laya gaya tha). 
   
   
     1833 tak revolt ki maa chud gayi. 
     
     
     
  2) Singphos Rebellion:- Ye lodo ne Assam me bhi chodampatti ki. Lekin 1830 tak inki bhi maa chod di gayi. 
  
  
     Chief Nirang Phudu ne fir, 1843 me dobara gaand marwane ki koshish ki.     
      
      
         1836 me Mishmis ne revolt kar diya. 
         
         1839 or 1842 ke beech khampatis ne bhi revolt kiya. 
         
         1842 or 1844 ke beech Lushais ne revolt kiya-----> Ye saalo ne Manipur ke viilages par attack kar diya. 
         
         
         
      
          1857 se pehle ke revolt : 
          
             1) Ahom Revolt : 1828-33, Assam  -- Wo burmese war wala randaap
             
             2) Khasis revolt, 1830s, Hilly region of Jaintia and Garo, under Tirath Singh
             
             3) Singhphos Rebellion : 1830, Assam
             
             
          1857 ke baad e movement :
          
          
              1) Kuki Revolt(1917-19; Manipur) : 1st World War me British log, ke recruitment policies ke against. 
              
              2) Tripura ke revolts : House Tax rates me hikes ke against. 
                      1863----> Parikshit Jamatia naam ke chode ke under.    
             
                      1942----> Reangs ne revolt kar diya, under Ratnami
                      
                      1920s---> Bharti Singh ke under. 
                      
                            
      
      
              3) Zeliangsong Movement : 1920s me Manipur me :   Zemi, Liangmei or Rongmei Tribes ke under---> Kyunki Kuki revolt ke under in sabki maa chud gayi thi, or British inhe protect nahi kar paye the. 
              
              
              4) Naga Movement : 1905 se 1930 ke beech, in Manipur : Jadonang ke under, British log ke against, Nagraj setup karne ke liye. 
              
              5) Heraka Cult : 1930s, Manipur me hi : Under Gaidinliu----> Is movement ki wajah se Kabui Naga Association bani thi
      
      
      
      
      
      
      
      1857 me jo Revolt hua tha us se pehle bhi Army me kai saare revolt ho chuke the : 
      
      
      
       1) 1764 me, Bengal ke sepoys ne mutiny kar di thi
      
       2) 1806 me Vellore me Mutiny ho gayi thi, jab sepoys bolte, BC ye tum hamare Social or religious practices me kyu lund ada rahe ho.  Is liye, unhone Ruler of Mysore ka banner thaam liya. 
       
       3) 1824 me 47th Native Infantary Unit me bagaavat ho gayi thi.   
       
       4) Agent 47 ke kaand se Inspire hokar, Agle saal,  Assam ki Grenadiar company ne bhi revolt kar diya. 
       
       5) 1838 me, Sholapur me Indian Regiment ne revolt kiya. 
       
     
       
       
     1856 me Lord Canning ne General Service Enlistment Act pass kiya---> Bengal Army ke recruits ko kahi bhi deploy hone ki condition sign karni padegi.   
       
       
    1857 wala revolt Meerut me start hua tha, jo Delhi se bas 58 km door hai. 10th May ko.    
       
       
      Is se pehle, February me 19th Native Infantry at Berhampore(WB) ne, nayi Enfield  Rifles use karne se mana kar diya tha.  
      
      April me, Mangal Pandy ne (34th Native Infantry ke), Apne unit ke sergent major ki maa chod di.    April 8th ko MP ko latka diya gaya. (Mangal Pandey, Jindabaad). 
      
      May me 3rd Native cavalry ke 85 logo ko 10 saal ki jail ho gayi, Greased cartridges refuse karne ke liye. 
      
      Agle din, Mutiny start ho gayi. 
            
      
      
      
         Delhi me General Bhakt khan, jise palta Lt. Willoughby or John Nicholson----> Delhi se Niklo Son
         
         Kanpur--> Nana Saheb ---> Sir Hugh Wheeler and Colin Campbell ----> Nana Ke Huge kanno me bell kon lagayega ? 
         
         Lucknow---> Begum Hazrat Mahal----> Iska Gangrape hua tha, by Lawrence, Inglis, Havelock, Outram ke dwara
         
         Bihar--> Kunwar Singh Buddha
         
         Faizabad---> Maulvi Agmadullah
         
         Jhansi---> Rani Laxmibai
         
         Bhagpat---> Shah Mal---> ye wo Mast banda, jiske tukde tukde kar diye the brits ne. 
         
         
         
         
    Reformist movements --> Brahmo Samaj, Prarthna Samaj, Aligarh Movement
    
    Revivalist Movements--> Arya Samaj and Deobandi Movement     
         
      
      
      
      
   Tharak Wali organisations
   
       Tharki logo ko purdah nahi pasand tha, kyunki babes ke chehre nahi dikhte the. 
       Unhe, Polygamy nahi pasand thi, kyunki is se unke liye, babes kam ho jaati thi. 
       Unhe Child Marriage bhi nahi pasand thi, kyunki is se wo ladkio ko behla fusla kar randi nahi bana patet the. 
       Unhe Widows pasand thi, isliye widow remarriage ko advoccate karte the. 
       
       Wo ladkio ka brainwash karne ke liye naye educational instis kholte rehte the.    
      
      
      
      
          Tharki logo ki madad ke liye, GoI ne bhi kai kaam kiye :
          
          
             i) 1829 ki regulation se pehle to  Bengal me, Fir 1830 me Madras or Bombay presidencey me bhi Sati abolish kar di gayi. 
             
            ii) Bengal me is se pehle, 1795 or 1804 ki regulations se Femal Infanticide par ban lag gaya tha. 
            
           iii) 1870 me ek act pass hua, jis se sab naye births register karwane compulsory kar diye gaye. 
           
            iv) PICV ki mehnat se, Hindu Widows Remarriage Act, 1856  pass hua
            
             v) Jagannath Shankar Muth or Boba Daji, bhadwo ne Maharashtra me pehle Ladkio ke liye, school ki shakal me randikhane khole. 
             
            vi) Aisa hi ek Gujrati Haramzada tha, Karsondas Muli, jo Lund Prakash naam ki Nudie mag publish kiya karta tha 1852 , jisme wo Widhwa aurato ke bobo ki pics dalta tha. 
            
           vii) West me DicK Karve or South me BraveDick Pantaloon, naame ke logo ne bhi khub saari widhwao ke maje liye. 
           
                  DicK Karve saala to itna tharak me pagal ho gaya, ki ek widhwa se hi shaadi kar baitha.   Log use dekh ke bolte the, "Are dekho dekho Widhwa chod, DK ja raha hai"
                  DicK Karve ko ye sunke gussa nahi balki proud feel hota tha. Usne, un logo ko jawab dene ke liye, Widow remarriage Association hi join karli, jaha wo widhwao ki boli lagata tha, kapde utarwake. 
                  Dick Karve ki bhook, yaha bhi thandi nahi hui. To saale ne Poona me, Ek Widow Khana khol liya, jaha wo high class escorts jaisi dikhne wali widows supply karta tha or unhe training bhi deta tha(Vocational)   
         
         
          viii) B.M Malabari Namard, Justice Govind Mahalund Randwe     and K. Lundrajan ====> Ye teeno bhi prominent widow premi the.         
          
            ix) Angrezo ne, Natives ko choti sexy ladkio ki chut marne se rokne ke liye, Native Marriage act, 1872 lagu kiya.   Lekin ye bas parsi babes par lagu tha.   Ise B.M Malabari Namard ne badi mushkil se pass karwaya tha. 
            
                Namard, ki wajah se hi, Age of Consent act, 1891 pass hua, jis se chudai ki age, 12 saal ho gayi. 
                1930 me Sarda act, se Marriage age, 18 or 14 years kar di gayi. 
                
                
            x) Christian missionaries ka dil, desi rando par 1819 me aa gaya tha, jab Calcutta Femal Juvenile Society ne school khol, ladkio ki panties utarna shuru kar diya tha. 
            
               J.E.D Bethune muthwale, ne Bethune school naam ke kai randi khane khole 1849 me.  Ye Calcutta ki Education council ka President tha. 
               
               PICV bhadwe ne to 35 randikhane khol, dhoom hi macha di, wo bhi akele Bengal me. 
               
               Charles Woods ka wood khada hua, 1854 me or usne Indian ladkio ko rande banane ke liye, plan tayyar kiya. 
               
               1914 me, Women's Meidcal Services ne Nurses or Mid-wives bharti karne ke bahane, pure desh se ladkio ka balatkaar kiya. 
               
           xi) DicK Karve, kaha chain se baithne wala tha. Saale ne 1916 me Indian Women's University naam ka insti khol, bohot bade level pe aurato ko sex education di. 
           
          xii) 1916 me hi, Delhi ki rando ko sexy banane ke liye, Lady Hardinge Medical Collage khola gaya. 
          
         xiii) Sarojini Naidu ne 1925 Bade Nehru ka bada lund chusa or INC ki president ban gayi, fir 1947 me Chote Nehru ka Chota lund chusa or UP ki Governor ban gayi. 
         
          
          
          Women's Organisations : 
          
          
             a) 1910 me Sarla Devi Chutkirani ne, Allahbaad me Bharat Stree BobaMandal ki pehli meeting ki.  Yaha use Boba Biryani Khatoon ki daadi mili thi. 
  [ Boba Biryani Khatton ki dadi, Purdah system abolish karne ki baat sun ke itna bhadak gayi, ki uske bobo se doodh nikalne laga, jise dekh waha khade ek mulle ne wahi muth marna shuru kar diya, or ground me bhagdad mach gayi.]
             
             
             b) Rambabe Randi ne Ladies Social Conference( Bharat Mahila Parishad ) start kiya, National Social Conference ke under hi. In 1904, in Bombay. 
             
             c) Lundita Gandbai Sexywati , ne Sexy Arya Mahila Samaj start kiya. Queen Victoria Dwara referred English education commission ki meeting me jaake Randita Rambai ne Heil Hitler bolkar apni chut se pani chor diya tha, jis se women education ka syllabus change ho gaya.   Is se Lady Dufferin College me medical education bhi start ho gayi, ye pata lagane ke liye, ki BC hitler ka naam sunte hi, chut se pani kaise nikalne lagata hai.   
             
           
             d)  1925 me National Council of Women in India start hua.  Ise, Mehribai TataSumoJaisiChutWali ne start kiya tha.    Ye bolti thi, Tata Sumo jaisi chut hai meri, Meribai hai mera naam. 
                                                                                                                                                National Council of Women, join karo, muft hai jiska daam. 
                                      
                                                                                                                                                
             e)  Cornelia SHarab Ji -- India ki pehli lady barrister thi. Isne court ke beecho beech,      Jai cornelia bolke Peshaab kar diya tha, jis se Judge bhi hairan ho gaya. 
             
             f) Tarababe Premchand====< Iska Husband jis bank me kaam karta hai, Babe us bank ki har branch ke manager se lund leti thi. 
             
             g)  Shaffi Tyabji Mullijaan---- Bombay ke ameer mulle ki mulli thi. 
             
             h)  Maharani SucharuChutwali Devi ----> Peshab ki beti                                                                                                                          
             
                
                         Cornelia, Tarababe, Mullijaan or SucharuChutwali----< Ye chaaro, TataSumoJaisiChutwali ki National Council of Women ki members thi. Ye paancho waha lesbian orgies karti thi. 
                         
                         
             i) 1927 me Margaret Cousins, Chote Nehru ko patake, Ferguson College le gayi thi, jaha wo us se khub chudi or us se All India Women's Conference(AIWC) shuru karne ke liye, Paise le liye. 
             
                  Kamla Baby Chuttophatyay, Sarojini Naidu, Lady Dorab TataNanoJaisiFuddiwali, Maharani Chuddakad Chimnabai Fuddifaad,   Sangli ki Rani Sahiba jiske 34 DDs the. 
                  
                     Ye sab rande, Margaret Cousins se baari baari se chut ragadwane aati thi AIWC ki meetings attend karne ke bahane.       
                     
                     
                           
             
             
       Neech Jaat ke uthhan ke liye : 
       
       
       i) Gandhi :-  Gandhi, bhangi logo ko sanghi banana chahta tha. Isliye, Gandhi ne All India Harijan Sangh found kiya, 1932 me, CDM ke fail ho jane ke baad. 
       
      ii) BRA : Isne All India Schedule Caste Federatuion banaya       
             
     iii) 1900s me Kolhapur ke Maharaja ne non-brhmin movement start kiya, jo baaki south ke states me bhi fail gaya.        
             
      iv) 1920s me E V Ramaswamy South India ke non-brahmins ne Salf-Respect movement start kiya or bola ki Hum bhangi log ko bhi temples me aane diya jaye. 
      
       v) Kerala ke Shri Narayan Guru ne Upper caste domination ke against puri life ladai ki. Inhone nara diya, " 1 religion, 1 caste and 1 God for mankind ". 
       
           To iska disciple, Sahadarn Ayyapan bola hai, " Ok Boomer ". 
           
      vi) 1927 me BRA ne Komal ka bra size naapne ke liye, MAHAD Satyagraha kiya. Ye 2500 bhangi leke, water tank par chadh gaya or bola, ki jabtak Komal apne bobe nahi dikhayegi, hum neeche nahi utarenge. 
      
     vii) Usi saal December me Manusmriti padhte padhte use komal ke boobs yaad aa gaye, or usne wo book hi jala daali apne garam khoon se. 
     
    viii) BRA ne is se pehle, apne kuch saathiyo ke saath milkar Bahishkrit Boba Muthkarni Sabha start ki thi, 1924, taaki wo Government ko jaake bata sake ki bhangi aurato ke boobs bhi mast hote hain, unhe bas support ki jarurat hai.    Iska motto tha, " Educate, Agitate, Titilate and oRganise "
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
  1)     Ram Mohan Roy : 1772-1833
       
                                                        Indian Renaissance ka baap
                                                        
                                                        Maker of Modern India
                                                        
                                                        Gift to monotheists
                                                        
                                                        Vedas to Bengali 
                                                        
                                                        Atmiya Sabha, 1814
                                                        
                                                        Vedanta = Reason
                                                        
                                                        Supported David Hare to found Hindu College in 1817
                                                        
                                                        Anti-Sati struggle, 1818
                                                        
                                                        Precepts of Jesus(1820)
                                                        
                                                        Eastablished Vedanta collage
                                                        
                                                        Brahmo Sabha, 1828---> Brahmo Samaj
                                                        (Purify Hinduism + Preach monotheism)
                                                        
                                                        
                                       His main villian = Radhakant Deb Chodumal, jisne Dharma Sabha organise ki to counter RMR's Ideas.                  
       
       
       
                 
             
             
             
    2)  Debendranath Tagore
    
    
        Ram Mohan Roy ko dekh sabki jalne lagi. Sab chahte the, wo bhi Hot Bengalan babes ke maje le sake.    Isliye  Debendranath, ne 1842 me Brahmo Samaj join kar liya tha.
        
         Is se pehle isne khudki, Tattvabodhini Sabha naam ka randikhana shuru kiya tha, 1839 me, lekin waha baasi rande aati thi, kyunki sab fresh maal Brahmo Samaj chala jaata tha. 
         
                
             DT ke piche piche iske 2 mutthal saathi : PICV  and AK 47 jaise lund wala Datta bhi aa gaye the Brahmo Sabha me. 
             
             
             
         Ye Hinduism ko anadar se purify karke, hindu rando ko sexy banane ka kaam karte the, Saath hi saath, Christian bhadwo ko bhi hindu aurato se door rakhte the.     
             
             
             Iske baad inki najre, Widhwa aurato ki taraf gayi. Fir inhone, Aurato ko sex education dena,   Polygamy ke khilaf ladai karna,    Ryot randis ki conditions improve karne jaise kaand bhi shuru kar diye karne. 
             
             
             
    3) Peshab Chandra Sen(1838-1884)
    
    
          Debendranath ne, Peshab ki chudai se prabhavit hokar, use Brahmo Samaj ka head bana diya, in 1858. 
          
           Peshab, bada hi madarchod insaan tha, wo 3 aurato ki ek saath chut marne ka daawa karta tha. Lekin wo capitalist mindset ka aadmi tha. Wo Brahmo Samaj ki branches ko Bengal ke bahar le gaya, Taki wo UP, Punjab, Bomabay or Madras ki rando ki bhi chut chaat sake. 
           
             Lekin, Peshab, aurato ko chodne ke baad, unki chut me hi peshab kar diya karta tha, jis se rando ki chut se badboo aane lagi thi. Is baat par peshab ki Debendranath se kai baar haatha pai bhi hui. 
             
                Peshab ne ek din kaha, ki hame Christian rando ko bhi kothe me laana chahiye, or hame neech jaat ki rande bhi lani chahiye, or aisa kehte hi uska peshab chut pada.   Bas, aisa sunte hi sab bhadak uthe, or 1865 me Bechare Peshab ko 'Acharaya' ke office se hata diya gaya. 
                
                
                
      
           Lekin Peshab kaha rukne wala tha. Usne kuch chutiye ikatthe kiye, or Brahmo Samaj of India naam ka national level ka kotha khol dala.    
             Ye log debendra nath wale kothe ko --> Adi Brahmo Samaj kehne lage.  Or waha jaane wale har aadmi, ko adi madarchod bulane lage. " are wo dekho adi madarchod, adi brahmo kothe ja raha hai". 
             
             
             
     Lekin, Peshab ne Firangi chut ke nashe me, apni 13 saal ki beti ki shaadi, Cooch Behar ke bete se karwa di.  Us ladki, ki chut marne ke sapne aadha bengal dekha karta tha. Or Brahmo Samaj of India ke chodo ke liye, ye baat waise hi thi, jaisi ksis ne bina unki permission ke unki daru ke nashe me nasbandi kar di ho. 
     
         Isliye, 1878 me, Jyadatar log, Group chor ke chale gaye or ek Brand new kotha khol dala===> Sadharan Brahmo Samaj. 
         
             Sadharan naam ke is kothe ko stat karne wale log, bade hi asaadharan kisam ke mahabaklol randwe the. 
             
                i) Anand mohan bose : Ye Boss ke speaker par gaane bajake, Mohani naam ki randi ko chodne ka aananad leta tha, or jhadne ke baad bolta tha---> " Aanaand mohan Bose" 
                
               ii) Shibchandra Deb  : Ye Chandra naam ki randi ke bobo pe shiv ji ki tasveer banata tha, or jor jor se dabane lagta tha, jis se randi chila uthi thi---" Daba Shibchandra dabaaaa "
               
              iii) Umesh Chandra Datta : Ye AK 47 jaise lund wale datta ka mama ka ladka tha. Ye bhi Chandra randi ko choda karta tha. Lekin ye chudai karne ke baad, Chandra ke Mu Me hi nikal deta tha, or bolta tha--" MuMesh"
              
          In teeno ko pata nahi kyu, Tamil chut chaatne ka bada man hua, to inhone, Madras province me apne kothe ki kafi sari branches khol daali. 
          
          Punjab, me Inhone ye kaam Dayal Singh Trust naam ke kuchiye ko outsource kar diya, jisne Dayal Singh College khola, Sexy punjaban rande ikathaa karne ke liye. wo bhi LaWhore me, in 1910. 
              (Dayal Singh, Trust ka dada tha. Is se chudne ke baad ladkia bolti thi, " O dyala aa ki kitaa, tu taan, meri bund paar ti, penchodyaaa ". jis par dyala bolta, " Dyal Singh Trust ".
              
              
              
              
     3) Prarthana Samaj
     
         1867 me, Peshab se milne uska ek dost aaya mumbai se-> Atamaram Pandulund.    Atmaram Pandulund, ko bhi bengalan babes ka paseena nikalna achaa lagta tha.     
         
         
              Atmaram ne is se pehle, Paramhans Sabha naam ka randhikhana kholne ki koshis ki thi, lekin waha randiyan aakar, "Atmaram Gu khale" bolke wapas chali jati thi. Atmaram, is wajah se kaafi pareshan rehta tha. 
              
              
            Peshab ke kothe pe chudai  karne ke baad, ek din Pandu  or Peshab, chat par baith ke maal funk rahe the. Tab peshab ne Pandu ko bola, " Pandu, bhai tu Bombay se itni dur kyu aata hai, Wahi pe koi randi khana khol le "
            
             Ye sunke, Pandu ki aankho se aansu aa gaye, or use Prarthna ki ki uska naya kotha kamyab hoga. Or isi liye, usne naye kothe ka naam, Prarthana Samaj rakha. 
         
         
         Justice Goving Mahalund Randwe ek din wakalat karke wapas ghar ja raha tha, tab Prarthana Samaj ke aage se nikalte hue use andar se Jor Jor se kisi ladki ke 'prarthana' karne ki awaaze suni. Usne andar jhank ke dekha to uske hosh ud gaye-- Andar,  Pandu, Peshab ki jawan ladki ki chut maar raha tha.  Justice ka ye dekh ke khada ho gaya, wo khud ko rok nahi paya or wahi pant khol ke muth marne laga. Justice ko is baat ka khayal hi nahi aaya , ki pandu ke 2 sipahi, uski ye gandi harkat dekh rahe hain.  Wo, justice ko pakad kar, Pandu ke paas le gaye. 
         
          Tab tak, pandu jhad chuka tha, or Peshab ki ladki behosh ho chuki thi.  Pandu, justice ko dekh ke bolta, " Dekho Justice, Galti to tumne ki hai. Lekin main tumhe maaf kar sakta hu ek shart pe, ki tum bhi Prarthana Sabha join karoge".   Ye sunke Justice ke chehre pe khushi ki lahar dod gayi or wo bola, "Jusitce Govind Mahalund Randwe".
          
          
           Justice apne saath apne kai tharki dost le aaya : i) R. G. Bhand hokar chodne wala
                                                            ii) N. G. Chada ikatha kar kar chodne wala
                                                          
                                                          
           Justice ne Prarthana kar karke, Samaj ko Pure India me famous kar diya.        Samaj me Lund Bhakti hone lagi. 
           
    Yaha 2 naye log bhi aane lage---> DicK Karve and Vishnu Shastri Maakichu   
    
           Dick Karve or Vishnu Shastri Maakichu ne milke, Widow Remariiage Movement start ki, jaha ye widhwa aurato ko prarthana karwate the.             
           
                                                                     
                                                          
         
         
         
     4) Young Bengal Movement: 1820s me Henry Vivian Derozio ne Hindu College ki ladkio ko ek saath chod daala, jis se Bengal ke young log kaafi prabhavit ho gaye. 
     
     
          Surendranath Fuddu Bengali, ne baad me bola ki, " Inse jo galti hui, wo inke lund ke jor ke aage fiki hain"
          
          
          
     
     
     
     5) PICV :     1850s      
     
        
               Ye Sanskrit College ka principal ban gaya tha.    Waha isne, Indian ladkio ka mind corrupt karne ke liye, Western Sexy thoughts introduce kiye. 
               
               Ye brahman rande chod chod ke thak gaya tha, to isne Non-Brahmin chut marne ke liye, Non-Brahmin ladkio ko bhi college me lana shuru kar diya. 
               
               Jab, ye Non-Brahmin ladkio se bore ho gaya to iski najar, aakhir me Widhwa aurato ki taraf gayi.   Is bhadwe ki wajah se hi Widow Remarriage legalise hui thi. 
               
               Isne, 35 school khol ke pure Bengal me gand faila diya tha. 
               
               Ye Bethune School ka secy tha, jaha ye Bethune ko Bengalan rande supply karta tha. 
               
               
               
               
               
               
      6)  Balshastri Jambhekar(1812-1846) 
      
      
      
           Darpan- 1832                                                       Elephant jaisa lund hai mera, Balshastri Jambhekar hai naam
           Father of Marathi Journalism                                       Native Native na kar pagli, Chut ka kardu kaam tamam
           Digdarshan                                                         Scientific hain thoughts mere, padhke dekho Darpan or Digdarshan aap
           Bombay Native General Library                                      Maharashtra ka bacha bacha bole, mujhe marathi journalism ka baap
           Elphinstone college         
               
               
               
     
     
     7) Paramhans Mandali (1849)
     
           Dadoba Pandurang, Mehtaji Durgaram                                     1849 ki thi wo raat, Dadoba or Mehtaji ka tha saath
           Reform Hindu religion                                                  Khatarnaak tha maal, khana bana tha  Marathi bhangan ke haath
           Manav Dharma Sabha							  Manav Dharam Sabko sikhane ki, waha ho rahi thi kuch baat
           Bhagio ke haath ka bana khana khate the                                Caste rules ko todenge, Marathi bhangan ki seals bhi
           Caste Rules ko todna tha                                               Dadoba Pandurang ho gaya hard,  lulli khadi hui, Mehtaji ki
           Marathi logo ke liye
     
     
     
      8) Satyashodhak Samaj 
      
              Jyotiba Pule(1827-1890)                                                                        Satya ki talash me nikla hai mali, 
              Mali                                                                                           Sarvajanik hai karta baat
              Smash Brahmanical Supremeacy                                                                   Brahmans ki gand pe mare laat 
              Truth Seekers society, 1873                                                                    Gulamgiri hai likhi kitaab
              Sarvajanik Satyadharm                                                                          Remarriage karwayega, Bacche padhayega
              Gulamgiri                                                                                      Mahatma bologe, to widhwao ke liye ghar banwayega
              Rajah Bali ka symbol                                                                           Raja bali ka tha ye fan
              Wife, Savitribai ke saath milke, Girls school in Poona                                         Savitri thi iski mam
              Widow remarriages bhi karwaye
              1854 me widows ke liye ghar khola
              'Mahatma' ka title bhi mila
              
              
        9) Gopalhari Deshmukh Lokhitwadi(1823-1892)
        
              Retired judge                                                                       Gopalhari naam hai mera, bhangio ka main heeteshu
              Weekly Prabhakar, under penname Lokhitwadi                                          Lokhit me likhta hu, Sab kehte mujhe maa ki chu
              Rationalist+Secular+Humanistic priciples                                            Rationality seekhata hu, Prabhakar chalata hu
              Weekly Heetechu                                                                     Jo koi aage aaye, use loda dikhata hu 
              Gyan Prakash and Indu Prakash                                                       Meri baate sunkar, na ho jaana tum niraash
                                                                                                  jaldi se kapde utaro indu, Lund se nikle mere prakash                                                     
              
              
                  
        10) Gopal Ganesh Agarkar(1856-95)


                                                                                                                       GG karte hi kat jayegi, tum logo ka jeevan   
                                                                                                                       kholo naye English schools, or Deccan education
                     Nationalist missionaries train karne ke liye.                                                     Khali na tum baitho son, College mera Fergusson
                     1911, started Hitvadi
                     Gokhale ki maut ke baad, Srinivas Shastri became president                                        Logo ko main reason sikhau, Aisa mera sapna hai
                     Tribal kids ke liye, Balwadis provide karte hain.                                                 Kesari hai Tilak ka, Sudharak mera apna hai
                     
                     
                     
                          
              
        11) Social Service League
        
        
                                              Joshi, Joshi, Joshi, Narayan Malhar hai
                                              
                                              GKG ka ye chela, jung ladne ko tayyar hai
                                              
                                              Mumbai, jayega, Trade Union chalayega
                                              
                                              Social Service ke naam pe khub dham kamayega.
                                              
                                              
       12)  Servants of India Society                                       
            
                   GKG(1866-1915)
                      Indian National Congress ka liberal leader 
                      Servants of India Society ka Founder, along with MG Ranade, in 1905 
                      National Missionaries tayyar karne ke liye,
         
                      Gokhle ke 1915 me marne ke baad, Srinivas took over
         
           
              
              
       13) Ramakrishan Mission 
       
                      
               Dakshineshwar ke kali temple me rehne wale, Ramakrishan Paramhans(1836-1886) ki teachings sunke Bengali excited ho jate the. 
               
                  
                        Paramhans ne hi Paramhans Math start kar diya tha. 
                        
                        Paramhans ke ludakne ke baad, Swami Vivekanand ne Phase II start kar diya, jab 1897 me Ramakrishan Mission start kiya. 
                        
                        Math or Mission ke HQ, Calcutta ke pass, Berar city me hai. 
                        
                        Paramartha(Service) and Vyavahar(Behaviour) ke beech gulf khatm karna. 
                        
                        
      
                     Ye apne aap ko Hinduism ka sect nahi mante. 
                     
                     Ye Idol Worship ko bhi bura nahi samajhte
                     
                     
      
      
      
      
      
      
        14) Dayanand Saraswati ka Arya Samaj
        
        
                      Pehla Arya Samaj unit, Mumbai me start hua tha 1875 me. 
                      Samaj ka HQ, 1875 me Lahore Shift ho gaya. 
                      
                      Satyarth Prakash me views likhe
                      Class, Casteless society banau che
                      Foreign rule se mukt karu che
                      Aryan Religion sabme failau che
                      
                      Vedas hain sabse sexy kitaabs
                      Vapas chalo Vedas pe
                      Lekin Modernity is aight, I guess
                      Puran hai, Full-o-shit
                      
                      Ignort priests ne bigada hai kaam
                      Maya ke concept se hindu ki nikli hai jaan
                      
                      God, Soul or prakriti to hai 3 alag cheeze
                      Jo hard work kare, wahi hai jeete
                      
                      Untouchability hai bura, Idolatry or Polytheism bhi nahi hai theek
                      Magic charms, Shraadhs, Caste rigidities me yakeen rakha, to mangoge jindagi bhar bheek
                      
                      Chaturvarna system to the merit be based, chodo
                      25 ke ladke, 16 ki ladkiya na ho jaye, jab tak nahi
                      
                      Hindu to hain, Bachho ke bhi Bachhe
                      Peshab, PICV, Randwa, Gopalhari, ache hain, Shayad
                      
                      Lahore me hi banega, pehla DAV, mere marne ke 3 saal baad, in 1886. 
                      Lala Hansraj, Lala Lajpat, Lala Lal chand, ye sab hain mere chele
                      Ye hai, Mahatma Party, jo chahte hain bas Sanskrit or vedic education
                      Or na inke saamne kabhi meat khana tum. 
                      
                      
                      
                      Guru Datta Vidyarthi or Lala Munshi ram, tum kyu ho naraj
                      Kyu kehte ho khudko swami shradhanand. 
                      Ye okay hai, Modern education ke
                      Inhe ke haath aaya fir, DAV school or college
                      
                             
                      Swami Shradhanand, ne 1900 me banaye Gurukul, in west punjab
                      Cause They wuz like, Fuck that nigga Mcaulay
                      
                      
                      Mulle, Christians ki maa ki fuddi,
                      Arya Samaj karga Shuddhi
                      
                                                                                                                                              
                                                                                                                                                              
            
            
            
            
            15) Seva Sadan
            
                Ye kon Beraham Parsi hai 1912 ka, 
                Jo khol baitha hai Seva Sadan
                
                Dayaram Gidumal, tum kyu ho iske saath
                Kyu widhwao ne bharta tumhara man
                
                Kya tumne hai dhoom machai, Kyu tumne hai roki chudai, 
                Age of consent act pass karwake, kyu tumne meri luli sukai
                
                
                Kyu karte ho tum Seva Sadan me kirkir
                Chupchaap edit karo na, Indian Spectator
                
                
                               
            
            
            16) Dev Samaj
            
                          2 saal hue hain Congress bane,
                          Kyun, Shiv Naryan Agnihotri
                          
                          Devo Samaj me nahi rehte shayne
                          Or Guru hote hain saale khatri
                          
                          Daru na chorunga, Maas bhi khaunga
                          Deva Deva karke, teri gaand bhi lejaunga
                          
                          
                          
          17)  Dharma Sabha
          
          
                    RRR ka jani dushman, hai hamara Radhakant
                    Dharma Sabha main khali baitha, nochta hai apni jhant
                    
                                    
                          
         18) Bharat Dharma Mahamandala
         
                     Padhe likhe gawar Dindus ke,
                     All India level pe organisation ko kehte hain kya
                     
                     Bharat Dharma Mahamandalaaaa, 
                     Bharat Dharma mahamandallaaaaaaa
                     
                     
                     Arya Samja , Throsophists , Ramkrishna ke 
                     All Idnia level ke dushmano ko kehte hain kya
                     
                     Bharat Dharma Mahamadlaaaaaa
                     Bharat Dharma Mahamandallaaaaa
                     
                     
                     MMM hai jiska member, South main hain jiske branches
                     Varanasi me hai jiska HQ, wo organsation hai kya
                     
                     Bharat Dharma mahamandallaaaaaa
                     Bharat Dharma mahamandalllaaaaa
                     
                     
                         
            
            
         19) Radhaswami
         
                   Banker bhi jab, Tulsi ugaye, Dharma failaye, khudko Shiv Dayal bulaye, 
                   
                   Samaj lena Kaljug aa gaya hai
                   
                   1861 me bhi jo Radhaswami ke gun gaye, Satsang karwaye, Renounce ho jaye
                   
                   Samj lena Kaljug aa gaya hai
       
       
       
       
       
          20)  Shree Narayan Guru Dharma Paripala (SNDP) Movement
          
          
                    Depress class or Upper wale, kaate ek dusre ka gala
                    Kerala ke Ezhava bole, Shree Narayan hum tera chelaa
                    
                    Toddy tapp, Life rangeen
                    Ezhava Numba 1, in sceen
                    
                    Installed a Shivalinga, at my bitch place,
                    Called it Aru-Vi-ppuram , to show some grace
                     
                         1888, say it wit me
                         
                            1888
                            
                     Started a mass movement, call it Aru-vi-ppuram
                     Created a Shetra Yogam, Gave ma dick to ya mum
                     
                  Aruvippuram Shree Naryan Guru Dharam 
                  Paripalana Yogam (SNDP)
                  
                  Stop eating meat, Stop tapping toddy, 
                  Start some shit, tapp some booty
                   
                         SNDP, Say it wit me
                         
                            SNDP, (1888)
                            
                            
                            
                                              
        21) Woke-Aliga Sanghi---> Anti Brahmans of Mysore, in 1905.
        
        
        22) Jusitce Movement:---->    No justice, No peace
                                      No Justice, No peace
                                      
                                       C.N mudaliar
                                       No Peace
                                       
                                       T.M. Nair
                                       No Peace
                                       
                                       P. Tyagraj
                                       No Peace
                                       
                                       Non-brahmins
                                       No Peace
                                        in legislature
                                        No Peace
                                        
                                       Madras Presidency
                                       No Peace
                                       Association of 1917
                                       No Peace
        
        
        
        
                                           
       
         
               23) Self-Respect Movement: 
               
                      Nai-Nai-Nai E.V. Rama Nai
                      Balaji Naidu, E V Rama nai
                      
                      1920, ke beech me pitai
                      Nai-Nai-Nai E.V. Rama nai
                      
                      Brahmans ki jamke, hui hai pitai
                       Nai-Nai-Nai E.V. Rama Nai                       
       
       
       
       
           24) Temple Entry Movement
           
                    Narayan Guru, Temple Chahiye
                    
                    Asan Kumar, Temple Chahiye
                    
                    Madhavan T.K. Temple Chahiye
                    
                       Vaikom se aai aandhi
                       Temple Chahiye
                       
                       K.P. Kesava
                       Satya Grah kariye
                       
                      Kyunki hame hai, 
                      Temple Chahiye
       
       
            CDM hua khatam, to kya
            Hume to sala Temple Chahiye
            
            K. Kelappan
            Temple Chahiye
            
            Poet Subrimaniyam 
            Temple Chaiye
            
            Krishna Pillai
            Temple Chahiye
            
            A.K.Gopalan
            Temple Chahiye
            
            Guruvayur chalo
            Temple Chahiye
            
            1936 aaya, 
            Travancore ka maharaja laya
            Proclamation 
            Jis se milgei, Temple Entry bhaiya
            
            
            
            
         25)    Indian Social Conference
         
         
                      Justice(Wahi) or Raghunath Rao ko pata nahi kya hai bukhar chadha
                      
                      Indian Social Media par conferecne karne ka, wo bhi Madras me
                      
                      1887 hai guys, Koi Social Media organisations to bahi hi nahi
                      
                      Tum kya khudko, INC ki social reform samjah rahe ho, bhai 
                      
                      Inter-Castr marriage karwago, 
                      Polygamy hataoge, 
                      Or BC ye kulinism hai kya bala, 
                      Pledge karke kya aajtak, kisi ka hua hai bhala. 
                      
                      
                      
        26)   Parsi Reform Movements: 
        
        
               Rahnumai Mazdayasnan Sabha (Religious reform association) --- 1851
               
                 Naoorojii Furdonjiii
                 
                 Dadabhai Naorojiiiii
                 
                 K. R. Cama, jiiiiiii
                 
                 S.S. Bengalee jiiii
                 
                 Rat ka gosht khao, 
                 Rat ka gosht
                 
                 Parda hatao
                 Parda
                 
                               
                      
       27) Singh Sabha Movement
                              
                              1873, me Amritsar me mile kuch kooch 
                              
                              Sikh ko milke, padhaye, aao hum, kuch kuch, kuch kuch
                              
                              Christians se khudko bachaye, Sach much ? Sach much
                              
                              Is liye, khole hain Khalsa School
                              
                              Akali Movement is an offshoot, cool cool
                              
                              Gurudwaro se nikalo mahanat, not cool, so not cool
                              
                              1922 me mani sarkar, jeet gaye hain SGPC ke sardaar
                              
                              Regional movement hai hamari,lekin hum national leader
                              
                              
                              
      28) Theosophical Movement
      
           H.P.Blavatsky and Colonel M.S.Olcott ne shuru kiya, New York me, in 1875. 
           
           1882 me ye aa gaye, Adyar. Karma, Upanisha or Samkhya Yoga seekhne, Vedanta bhi
           
           1908 me Annie beasant ko leader banaya, Indians ko bada maja aaya                        
                              
           Kyunki, madam ne 1898 me Benaras ka Central Hindu College the banaya
           
           Yahi, 1916 me jaake bana, Banaras Hindu University, jispar chala kala saya
           
           
           
                              
                              
                              
                                                                     The Greatest Poem Ever told
                                                                     
                                                                     
                                                                     
                                                    Nationalism aa raha hai duniya me, Thanks to French revolution
                                                    
                                                    Indian renaissance ne lai hai badle ki aandhi, gawar hue hain kuch kam
                                                    
                                                    British laye modernisation, saath hi saath imperialism
                                                    
                                                    Jis se hain hum backwards, jis se chalni hue hain mere jism
                                                    
                                                    
                                                    
                                                    Peasant, Artisan, worker, vyapari, Saale britishers ne sabki hai maari                 
                                                          
                                                    Kashmir se comorin tak, Assam se khyber tak, lut rahi hai jaan hamari
                                                    
                                                    Brits laye political unity, civil service, or judges bhrastachari
                                                    
                                                    Common Civil or Criminal laws se , ek ho gayi hai story hamari                 
                                                    
                                                    
                                                    
                                                    Link ho gaye hain hamare fate
                                                    Bhuke hain mere bache, kyunki
                                                    Fail hui hai crop tumhari
                                                    
                                                    
                                                    Milton, Shelley, Mill ya Rousseau
                                                    
                                                    Voltaire, ya Spencer, kis kis ko kosu
                                                    
                                                    Rational, Secular, Democratic pissu
                                                    
                                                    Inhe padhu, ya main puju yeesu
                                                    
                                                    
                                                    
                                                    
                                                    
                                                    Foreign me travels, Press ki padhai
                                                    Train ki raftaar, hame saath hai lai
                                                    
                                                    
                                                    
                                                    
                                                    Max Mueller, Monier Williams, Roth or Sasson
                                                    Bhandarkar or Mitra, ne sunye hain purane kisse
                                                    
                                                    Sunke jinhe, badha hai mera self respect
                                                    Kyunki past me the mere kaafi ache prospects
                                                    
                                                    Indo-Aryans ke naam se mila hai mujhe Psycological boost
                                                    Foreign Rulers ko bhagane ke naam, present kar raha hu main ye toast
                                                    
                                                    Jo nayi middle class hai ubhar ke aayi, 
                                                    Wo unity or hope ki aandhi hai layi
                                                    
                                                    South America ho ya Greece, ya ho Italy ya Ireland
                                                    Sab jagah ho rahe desh aajad, hum or nahi marwayenge gand
                                                    
                                                    
                                                    
                                                    Lytton tha reactionary saala, 
                                                    ICS 21 se 19 kar daala( 1876 me)
                                                    Agle saal Delhi Durbaar lagaya, 
                                                    Jab tha yaha Famine aaya
                                                    Uske baad laya, Vernacular press act
                                                    Hathiyar, hamse cheen, toda usne ek pact
                                                    
                                                    Ripon to tha hamari dost, par illert bill ki controversy aai
                                                    Justice or fair play ki baate, kya bas tamasha thi bhai
                                                    
                                                    
                                                    
                                                    
                                                    INC se pehle bhi the kai pol associations
                                                    Lekin, sab the saale, ammer logo ke
                                                    Jinka, paise se hi bharta tha bas man
                                                    
                                                    RRR ka Bangbhasha Prkasika Sabha
                                                    Ye, landlords ki Zaminadi association
                                                    
                                                    Bengal ki British Indian Socity,
                                                    Dono mil bane  British Indian Association
                                                    
                                                    Comapny ke charter me chahte the changes, 
                                                    Bheji jiske liye, Brit parliament ko rangers
                                                    
                                                       Alag se banao ek naya legislature
                                                       Judiciary se executice ka karo seperation, 
                                                       
                                                       Higher ofiicers ki salary khatakar
                                                       Salt duty, abkari ka karo abolition
                                                       
                                                       Kuch to hui ye demands met,
                                                       Jab aaya 1853 ka Charter act
                                                       
                                                       
                                                       
                                                       
                                                1866 me Parsi jayega British parli, aisa baham koi na pale       
                                                 Dadabhai the, London wale, jisne jaale bade se daale
                                                 East India Association banai, jo uske kabhi kaam na aai
                                                 London me ki khub chudai, Liberals ki maa chudwai
                                                 
                                                       
                                                 Sisak Sisak ke nikle Sisir Kumar ki Cheekh
                                                 Par 10 saal pehle kholi, INC se Indian League   
                                                 
                                                 
                                                 
                                                 Fuddu Bengali Fuddi Bengali kaha jaa rahe ho
                                                 INA khudko bulwaya, ab pacht rahe ho
                                                 Anand Mohan Bose ne bola, 
                                                 BIA tha Maa ka lola
                                                 Landlords ke lene ki dono ne thani
                                                 Kyunki, INC 10 saal baad hai aani
                                                 Civil Service Reform hai Chahte
                                                 England jakar paper na de pate
                                                 Vernacular Press act, or arms act par kiya prahar
                                                 Fuddu Bengali, or Bhadwa bose, the dono bade pakke yaar
                                                 
                                                 
                                                 
                                                              Indian National Association, 1886 me INC me merge ho gayi. 
                                                    
                                                    
                                                    
                        Justice 1867 tak, Pehsab ki beti ke pyar me is kadar deewana ho gaya ki, Usne Poona Shahar me Sarvajanik Sabha aayojan kar, logo ko saamne, Peshabi ki beti ki tasveer par muth mara.   
                        
                        
                        
                        
                        
                    
                Congress ban ne se pehle ye sab campaigns chalyi gayi thi:
                
                
                   i) Cotton par import duty lagao behen ke lodo (1875)
                   2) Governemt services me Indians bharti karo
                   3) Lytton ko  bolo, take it easy on them Afghan sons of bitches
                   4) Or ye kya Arms act pass kiya hai (1878)
                   5) Or BC , ye vernacular press ki kyu gand le rakhi hai (1878)
                   6) Or hame right hona chahiye volunteer corps join karne ka
                   7) Chodu plantions and ye kya sada hua Inland Emigration act banaya hai betichod
                   8) Illbert bill ko pass karwao
                   9) All India level pe political Agitation karne maafik fund mangta hai boss
                  10) BC, hum us fund se Britain me jaake campaign karenge, Pro-India party ko jeetane ke liye. 
                  11) ICS me appear hone ki age kam karo, taki main dobara attempt de saku    
                    
                    
                    
                    
                    1885 me Bombay ke Gokuldas tejpal Sanskrit College, me A O Humne ne Pure India se 72 delegates ikatthe kiye. 
                    
                       Is session ko preside kiya tha Women jaise dikhne wale, Womesh Chandra Bonnerjee. 
                    
                    
                           Dada Naoroji 3 baar president bana, raat ka gosht kha khake. 
                           
                           Badruddin Tyabji, P.Mehta, p.Anandcharlu, Fuddu Bengalee, Romesh Chandra Dutt, Mohini ke anand lene wala Bhadwa Bose or GKG---> Ye sab log bhi Congress ke presidents reh chuke hain. 
                    
                        
                           Justice, BGT, Sisakne wala Ghosh, Iska bhai Moti, MMM, The Hindu wala Aiyar, C. Brave Raghav Chari,  Dinshaw E. Watchout ----> Ye sab congress ke bade leaders the.
                        
                        
                        
                        
                        
                        
                1890 me Kadambini Ganguli ne Calcutta University ke dean ka lemon chus liya, jis se wo Idnia ki pehli women graduate ban gayi.   
                Ye khabar sunke, Sab khangressio ke mu se paani behne laga, kyunki Kadambini bhayanka hot thi. Isliye, unsabne use Congress sessionn address karne ke bahane bulaya, or Stage pe sabke saamne Bukake kiya. 
                
                
                
                        
                        
                     Lala Lajpat Rai or Even R.P Dutt jaise Kaamrade Historian ko bhi lagta tha, ki INC to Hume or Dufferin ki saajish hai.    
                        
                        
                        
                        
                     
                     
                     
                     Initial Stages me Congress ke objectives the :
                     
                        1) Ek Democratic Nationalistic Movement tayyar karna (Basically, ye pressure group, jo power hadapna chahta hai British logo se)
                        2) Jiske baad, logo ko politicise or politically educate kiya jayega (Basically propaganda failana)
                        3) Movement ke liye HQ tayyar karna
                        4) Pure desh ke baaki 'Shyaane' Nationalist leaders ke saath freindly relations banana,(Basically, khareed lena unhe Rande supply karke).
                        5) Anti-colonial nationalist ideology develop or propagate karne ( Basically, Propaganda material tayyar karna))
                        6) Logo ko common economic or political programme ke unify karne ke liye, Governemtn ke saamne popular demands rakhna (Matlab, logo ko slogans/placards pakadwake, police ke dandde khane ke liye lagana)
                        7) Religion, Caste or Province se upar uthkar, ek National Unity ki feeling ko consolidate karna ( basically, tarah tarah ke chutiyo ko sapne deekha ke apne peeche laga lena)
                        8) Indian Nationhood ko bade dhyan se Promote or nurture karna
                        
                        
                        
                        
                        
              Ye sab kaan karna jin log ne shuru kiya wo Moderate leaders the, or ye sab drama chala kuch 20 saalo tak (1885-1905) 
              
                 Isme Important moderate leaders the :- Dadabhai Naoroji, P. Mehta, D.E Watchout, Mota Bonnerjea, Fuddu begalee
                 
                    -Ye chode, 'liberalism' or 'moderate' politics me yakeen rakhte the. 
                    
                    - Ye kaanun ke dayre me rehte hue, Constitutional agitations kiya karte the.    Is se slow but orderly political progress hoti thi. 
                    
                    - In chutiyo ko lagta tha ki British log just hain, bas unhe apni needs ke baare me samjhana hai
                    
                    - GoI tak, Resolutions, Petitions, Meetings etc ke through apni public demands present karni hai. 
                    
                    - Ye sab karne ki inki 2 pronged strategy thi - i) Strong public opinion banao, national spirit ko arouse karne ke liye, taki log common political questions par ek ho sake
                     
                                                                    2) Nationalists jo line dikha rahe hain, us par chalne ke liye, fir British gov ko persuade karo, taki wo reforms introduce kar sake
                                                                    
                                          - Iske liye wo ' Prayers' and 'Petitions' karte the, or wo fail ho jane pe , 'Constitutional Agitation' kiya karte the. 
                                          
                                          
                    - 1889 me in log ne, London me, INC ki ek British committee bhi banayi thi. Dadabhai, ye sab kaam me aage rehte the.                                                                           
                                                       
                                                       
                    - Inhe lagta tha, ki Brits ke saath political connections Indians ke fayde me hai, or agar is stage pe directly challenge kiya to Britis hamari maa chod denge. 
                    
                    
                    
                    
                                                       
                                                       
         Kya kya Ukhaad paye ye log : 
         
         
             1) Dadabhai, RC Dutta, Dinshaw Watchout, ne "Drain threory" tayyar ki.
             
                  All-India public opinion tayyar kiya ki, BC India ki poverty or economic backwardness ka main cause, British rule hai. 
                  
                  
             2) Ye bolte ki, India ki development ke liye, Indian Capital or Enterprise ko promote karna chahiye. 
             
             3) Inhone, Land Revenue me reduction demand ki,   Salt tax ko abolish karne ko bola,      Plantation labour ki condition improve karne ko bola,     Military expenss kam karo,    Moden Industries ko encourage karo
             
             
             4) Imperial Legislative council me reform ki baat ki : 
             
                      a) Indians ki jyada participation ke liye, councils ko expand karo
                      
                      b) Councils ko jyada power do, takki, especially finance jaisi cheezo par jyada control ho sake. 
                      
             5) Inka long term goal tha---> Democratic self government
             
             
             6) Inke kaafi saari demands man li gayi, through 1892 ke Indian councils act se. 
             
             
             7) Lekin, is se Inka pet nahi bhara to ye demand karne lage : 
             
                   a) Elected Indians ki majority ho 
                   
                   b) Budget par contol ho
                           (vote karne ki, or amend karne ki power ho) 
                                
                  "No Taxation, without representation" ka naara de daaala BC.
                  
                  
                  
            8) Iske baad to ye saale, apni aukat se badhkar Self governemt on the lines of Self-governing colonies of Canada and australia, jaisi baate karne lage. 
             
                i) Dadabhai Naoriji ne 1905 me
               ii) GKG ne 1905 me
              iii) Tilak ne 1906 me
              
              
             
           9) In councils me khade hokar, leaders ne jo policies ki dhajjiyaan udai hain, use se i) Unka Political stature badha  ii) National movement build hua   iii) Imperialist rule ka moral influence kam hua
           
           
        
        
        
              Government ki INC se gaand fati to usne, Syed Ahmed Khan or Raja Shiv Prasad of Benras jaise tatto ko ikatha kar, United Idnian Patriotic Association banaya, Congress ke propaganda ko counter karne ke liye. 
        
        
        
        
        
        1905 aate aate, Militant Nationalism ka ubhar hone laga. 
        
            Reasons :     1) British demands par muth maar ke lota dete the, to Logo ka british rule ka true nature samajh aane laga. 
        
         
                          2) 1896 or 1900 ke beech famines me 90 lakh log mar gaye. 
                          
                          3) Deccan me Bubonic plague aa gaya. 
                          
                          4) Rights dene ki jagah, GOvernment to rights cheen rahi thi : 
                          
                                    i) 1892 me Indian council act, jo satisfy nahi kar paya
                                    
                                   ii) 1897 me Natu brothers ko bina trial ke hi deport kar diya gaya, or Tilak par Sedition ka aarop laga, jail me fek diya gaya
                                   
                                  iii) 1898 me IPC Section 124A ke under repression ki aandhi layi gayi
                                  
                                   iv) 1899 me Calcutte coroporation me Indian members ka number kam kar diya gaya.                [Lord Curzon Badelundwale, 1899 me aaya tha] 
                                   
                                    v) 1904 me Officials secrets act, se freedom of press curb hui
                                    
                                   vi) 1904 me Indian Universities act, se GoI ka Unviersitites par control badh gaya 
                            
                            
                         5) British, ab mass or techinal education ke spread ko bhi supress karne lage the. 
                         
                         6) Tialk, Aurobindo or Bipan Chandra Pal, Logo ko self-respect sikha rahe the, or masses ko involve karne ki baate kar rahe the. 
                         
                         7) Education ke spread se, ek taraf to awareness badhi, lekin saath saath Padhe likhe, berojgaars ka number bhi badha. 
                         
                         8) Japan ne 1868 ke baad jo progress ki thi, use dekh sab bhayanak prabhavit ho gaye. 
                         
                         9) Ethiopians(1896) , Boer Wars(1899), Japan Vs Russia(1905), se European Master race and shieeet ka bhram khatam ho gaya. 
                         
                        10) Swami vivekananda, Bankim chadra, Swami Dayananada Saraswati jaise logo ne kai young nationalists ko inspire kiya, ancient india ki richness describe karke. 
                        
                                                              (Dayananda ne message diya- " India for Indians "
                                                              
                                                              
                       11) Younger Nationalists , Moderated ke 3Ps(prayer, petition, protes) ke method se tang aa gaye the                                       
                         
                       12) Curzon ka 7 saal ka rule, that was FUBR --> Official Secrets act, Indian Uni acts, Calcutta corporation act, Partition of Bengal 
                       
                       13) Naye Nationalist leaders :- Raj Narain Bose, AK-47 jaise lund wala Datta, Aurobindo ghosh, Bipin Chandra pal, Vishnu shastri Chiptunemaker, BGT, Lala
                         
                             Ye sab : a) Foreign rule se nafrat
                                      b) End Goal - Swaraj
                                      c) Direct political Action chahiye
                                      d) Masses ki capacity me yakeen, to challenge the authority
                                      e) Personal Sacrifice dene ke liye hardam tayyar
                                      
                                      
                                      
                                      
                                      
                 Swadeshi Movement:
                 
                 
                    Ye start hua tha, Bengal ki partition ke against start hue, Anti-partition movement se.
                    
                    - 1903 me hi brits ne bol diya tha, ki wo saale Bengal ko partition karenge
                    - 2 provinces ban ni thi- i) West Bengal(jisme Bihar or orissa bhi honge) + ii) East Bengal
                    - Bengal, jo nerve centre tha Indian nationalism ka, use weak karne ke liye. 
                    - 2 alag alag admins me bengalis ko rakhne se unhe divide kiya ja sakta tha : 
                    
                                                                           i) Language ke basis pe : Bengalis, Bengal me hi minority ban jaate
                                                                          ii) Religion ke basis pe : West- Hindu, East- Muslim majority
                    
                    
                    - Curzon bhadwe ne, Mullo ko  bola ki Dacca, Naye muslim majority province ka naya capital ban ke ubharega
                    
                    
                       1903 se 1905 ke beech, Moderates ne chalaya Anti-Partition Campaign
                       
                       
                          - Leader the : Fuddu Begalee, K.k Mitra, Prithwishchandra ray
                          - Methods : Govt ko petitions, Public meetings, memoranda and propaganda(using pamphlets and newspapers like Hitbadi, Sanjibani and Bengalee)
                          
                          - July 1905 me GoI ne partition ka plan, sab ho halle ke bavjood pass kar diya
                          - Isi ke baad, jo shor sharaba hua, usme koi darudiya uthke bola, " BC hame, Boycott resolution pass kar dena chahiye "--> 7th August, 1905---> Calcutta Townhall ki meeting me. 
                          - Boycott of Machester Cloth and liverpool salt
                          
                          - October 16, 1906 ko partition came into force----> Ise Day of mourning ki tarah manaya gaya pure bengal me. 
                          - Log, Bande Matram gaaate hua, Ganga nadi me dub ke mar gaye. 
                          - Rabindranath Tagore, ne is liye, 'Amar Sonar Bangla' likha. 
                          - Log, Unity dikhane ke liye, ek dusre ka lund chusne lage, or jo milta use rakhi bandhne lage. 
                          - Shaam hone par, Fuddu bengalee, or Uske param mitra, Bhadwa Bose, ne kaafi badi meeting ke beech ek dusre ke lund chuse or Rs 50 K ikatthe kar,Swadeshi Bitcoins me invest kar diye
                          
                          - Ye bhadwapana, dheere dheere, pure desh me fail gaya
                          
                          - Tilak, poona and Bombay me udhham machane laga
                          - Lala or Ajit Singh, Punjab me gadar failane lage
                          - Delhi, me Syed Haider Raza naam ke mulle ne kamaan sambhali
                          - Madras me Chidambaram Pillai ne bola, " Bengal partition karke, tum ham me foot dall loge, or hum khade khade dekhte rahenge, aisa tumne sochta tha, ye mujhe pata.... " 
                          
                          
                           
                          
                          
                          Bhadwi Congress in 1905 
                          
                          
                          
                             - 1905 me Gokhale ke under INC ki meeting hui :    Benaras Session
                             
                                    a) Partition ko Condemn kiya
                                    b) Anti-Partition and Swadeshi movement of Bengal ko support kiya
                                    
                             - Lekin militant leader, chahte the ki curzon ki gand me bomb fode jayen, taki movement pure India me fail sake, or bas kapde boycott karne ki jagah, hame Swaraj ki demand karni chahiye. 
                             
                             - Lekin, Moderates ki ye sunke fat gayi. Wo coucil ke boycott ke bilkul khilaf the.   Wo bas constitutional methods se protest karna chahte the. 
                              
                            
                             
                          
                          Bhadwi Congress in 1906
                          
                            
                            - 1906 me INC ne Calcutta me session kiya, under the leadership of Dadabhai Naoroji (Extremist chahte the, Tilak ya Lala me koi bane, lekin buddhe ki respect karte the to jyada chain chain nahi ki)
                            
                               a) Decide hua ki, Congress ka goal hai--> "Self-gov/Swaraj like the UK and colonies of Australia and Canada". 
                               
                          
                            - Extremists ka ye sunke khada ho gaya. To unhone josh josh me, Swadeshi + Boycott ke baad ke nayi demand bhi rakh dali--> Passive resistance
                            
                            - PR ke under, Government schools, colleges, Gov Services, courts, legislative councils, muncis, govt titles etc, sabka boycott karega re tera tilak. 
                          
                          
                          
                                   (Moderates, ko goro ne Council reforms ki batti pakda di thi, jiski wajas se wo Calcutta session ke programmes ko tone down kar rahe the)
                                       (England me is time Liberals power me the)              
                          
                          
               
                          
                                                      
                            - Extremist log, Foreign cloth ko publically burn karne lage, Foreign made salt/sugar ka boycott karne lage, Dhobi log, pant-shirt dhona band karne lage, jis se Dhobi khaaj fail gayi, or log Haigure rak..
                            
                            - AK-47 jaise lund wale datta ne, Swadeshi Bandhab Samitis banayi, mass mobilisation karne ke liye. 
                            
                            - TN ke Tirunelveli shahar me, Chidambaram Pillai, Subramania Siva etc ne milke, Swadeshi Sangam banaya, jis se local masses inspire ho gaye. 
                          
                            - Tilak, apne Shivaji or Ganpati festivals se Swadeshi propaganda failane laga. 
                            
                            - Aurobindo Ghosh ne Bengal National College start kiya, jo Tagore ke Shantiniketan se inspired tha. (Oh My ghosh bro, why you setting up a fucking college, when all you had to do was boycott the damn..)
                            
                            - 15th August, 1906 ko National Council of Education ko bhi setup kiya gaya. 
                          
                            - Bengal Institute of Technology ko setup kiya gaya, for technical training. 
                            
                            - Swadeshi ke naam pe logo ne khoob note bhi chaape - i) Swadeshi Textile mills, soap and match fatories, tanneries, banks, insurance companies, shops, etc
                            
                                                                                 ii) V.O chidambaram pillai ne Swadeshi Steam Navigation Company khol li, at Tuticorin
                                                                                 
                            - Rabindranath Tagore, Ranjnikat Sen, Dwijendralal Ray, Mukunda Das, Syed Abu Muhammad ke songs se inspiration mili. 
                            
                                - TN me, Subramania Bharti ne Sudesha Geetham likha, jo bhayanak hit ho gaya. 
                             
                             
                             - Abanindranath Tagore ne Ajanta, Mughal or Rajputana style se inspiration leke, victorian domination ko challenge kiya. 
                             
                             - Nandalal Bose---> 1st recipient of a scholorship offered by Indian Society of Oriental art, founded in 1907. 
                             
                             - Science me, Jagdish Chandra Bose , prafullachandra ray etc ne pioneering research ki. 
                             
                             
                             -Students or Women ne participate kiya, lekin Mulle Door rahe. 
                             
                             - Subramania Siva or Chidambaram Pillai ne Tuticorin and Tirunelveli me Foreign owned mills me strike karwai. 
                             
                             
                             
                             
                             
                          1907 ka Session : When it all came crashin down : Surat-SPLIT
                          
                          
                             - Extremist chahte the, 1907 ka session, Nagpur me ho, or Tilak/Lala me se koi president bane + Swadeshi/Boycott/National Education resolution ko reiterate kiya jaye. 
                             
                             - Moderates chahte the, session Surat me ho taki Tilak na ban paye prez.  Wo Rashbehari Bose ko president chahte the +  Swadeshi/Boycott/National Education resolution ko drop karna chahte the
                             
                             
                                Aakhir kaar Moderates ki jeet hui. 
                                
                                
                         1907 se 1911 ke beech, GoI ne, 5 naye laws pass kiye, or Extrmeists ki maa chod di.        
                             
                             
                                                           i) Seditious Meetings act, 1907
                                                          ii) Indian Newspapers(Incitement to Offences) act, 1908
                                                         iii) Criminal Law Amendment act, 1908
                                                          iv) Indian Press act, 1910
                             
                             
                                       - Tilak ko 1908 me Kesari me likhe gaye apne ek article ke liye, Sedition trial bhukatna pada. 
                             
                                            Tilak was found guilt or bhai ko 6 saal ke liye Burma Jail bhej diya gaya. (BC 1000 Rs ka fine bhi laga)
                                            
                                        - B C Pal to retired hi ho gaya politics se
                                        
                                        - Lala Videsh chala gaya, sir pakka karne ke liye.      
                             
                             
                                          - Youth , Extremists ke saath thi, to moderates ki bhi maa chud gayi. 
                             
                         1911 me Partition ko annul kar diya gaya. Or Capital ko Delhi Shift kar diya gaya( Mullo ko khush karne ke liye) 
                            
                              Bihar or Orissa ko Bengal se alag kar diya gaya. Assam ko bhi ek alag province bana diya gaya.     
                             
                             
                            
                          
                          
                          
                       1909 ke Morley-Minto Reforms
                       
                             ( 1906 me Mullo ka ek group, Simla Deputation, led by agha khan, Lord Minto se mila. Inhone, Seperate electorate demand kiye, mullo ke liye )
                             
                               Nawab salimullah of Dacca ne jo 1906 me jo Muslim league banai thi, uspar, isi group ne kabja kar liya.    
                          
                          
                            Isi beech, GKG bhi England gaya, Lord Morley se milne, Jo Secy of State for India tha.
                          
                          
                          Moderates or Mullo, dono ko placate karne ke liye, Morley-Minto Reforms laye gaye, in the form of Indian Councils Act of 1909. 
                          
                          
                          
                          
                 1) Councils ki non-official Membership ke liye, Elective principle ko recognise kar liya gaya. 
                                (Indians ko allow kar diya gaya, elections me participate karne ke liye, lekin on the basis of class and community)
                 2) Mullo ke liye seperate electorates. 
                             
                 3) Imperial Legislative council or Provincial Legislative councils me Elected Members ka number increase kiya gaya. 
                             
                    a) Provinces me to Non-Official Majority de di gayi. 
                    b) Par, kyunki, Ye sale non-officials me se bhi kuch nominated the(and not elected), isliye, non-elected majority abhi bhi bani rahi.     
     
                    c) Imperial Legislative council me, total 69 me se 37 official or 32 non-official  the. 
                    d) 32 me se, 5 nominated the, or 8 seat millo ke liye reserved thi, 4 seats british capitalists ke liye or BC 2 landlords ke liye. 
                                     
                          
                          
                 4) Elected members ko indirectly elect kiya jana tha. Local bodies, electoral college ko elect karti, jo fir baad me provincial legislatures ko elect karte, or jo fir Central legislature ke members elect karte. 
                             
                 5) Legislatures ki powers ko badha diya gaya. Ab legislatues, resolutions pass kar sakte the, questions puch sakte the, supply bhi, budget ke seperate items par vote kar sakte the(Pure par nahi)
                 
                 6) Viceroy ki executive council me 1 Indian ko appoint kiya jana tha. 
                 
                              ( Satyendra Sinha was the 1st Indian to be appointed in 1909) 
                              
                              
                          
                          
                          
           Brits ke randaap se tang aakar, 1907 se 1917 ke beech ke 10 saal me khub khoon kharaba hua---> 1st Phase of Revolutionary terrorism
           
                - Russian nihlists or Irish Nationalists se prabhavit hokar, Revolutionaries kud pade, goro par prahaar karne. 
                - Direct assassinations of officials, traitors, 'Swadeshi Dacoities'. 
                - Britain ke enemies ke saath military conspiracies. 
                
                
                 -Objectives :- Rulers ke dilo me terror strike karne ke liye ,  Logo ko arouse karne ke liye,   Logo ke minds se authorities ka fear hatane ke liye. 
                 
             
                 
                 
                 
        Bengal : 
        
        
            - 1870s, tak student communities me secret societies bani hui thi, lekin wo kaafi active nahi the. 
            
            - Pehla revolutionary group organise hua, 1902 me, in Mindanpore, under Jnanendranath basu or Calcutta me under 'Promote the mitter, Jatindranath Banerjee, Barindra Kumar Ghosh etc-Jise Anushilan samiti khte the       
                          
            - 1906 me, Anushilan ke hi ek group(Baindra kumar Ghosh or Bhupendranath Dutta) ne ek Weekly 'Yugantar' shuru kiya, or kuch abortive operations conduct kiye.               
                          
            
            
            - Rashbehari Bose or Sachin Sanyal, to sabke baap nikle, inhone, Punjab, Delhi , UP jaise areas tak me secret societies bana daali. 
            
            - Hemchandra kanungo, bhai to inka bhi dada nikla, or Videsh chala gaya training lene. 
            
                          
                          
                          
            - 1907 me Yugantar ne, Sir Fuller naam ke retired judge ki gaand me ghoche diye. 
            
            - 1907 me hi BC, inhone, ek train palatne ki koshish ki jisme , LG Sir Andrew Fraser ja raha tha.               
                          
                          
            - 1908 me, Prafulla Chaki or Khudiram Bose, ne 2 british aurato ko bomb se uda diya( RiP Bitches)
            
            - Iske baad, sara anushilan group hi arrest ho gaya. ----> Inke upar ALIPORE CONSPIRACY CASE chala. 
            
               -Chitraranjan Das ne Aurobindo Ghosh ko defend kiya tha case me.  Ghosh bach nikla.
               - Barindra Ghosh, bechare ko bomb banane ke liye, latka diya gaya. 
               
               
            
            
            - 1908 me, Dacca Anushilan ne, Barrah Dacoity organise ki. ---> Under Pulian Dass ( 12 dacoity kiye hain, hamre pulian bhaiyaaa)
            
            
            
            - In sab kaand se josh me aaye, Rashbehari bose or Sachin Sanyal to BC, Viceory Hardinge ke upar Bomb feka. 
            
                - Iske baad, Delhi Conspiracy case chala--> Basant Kumar Biswas, Amir Chand or Avadh Behari---> In teeno ko latka diya gaya.( RiP Dudes) 
                - Rashbehari bhaiya, nikal gaye bach bachaake. 
                
                
            - Western Anushilan ka leader, jiske baad ban gaya Jatindranath Mukherjee a.k.a Bagha Jatin----> Ye group Jugantar ke naam se jana jaane laga. 
            
            - 1st World War ke time, Jugantar Pary ne, German Arms import karne ka plan banaya, Under Zimmerman Plan. 
            - Lekin, kisi suar ne plot leak kar diya, or Bagha jatin, Balasor(1915) me Guns ki delivery lete time, Police Encounter me shaheed ho gaye. (RiP Sweet Prince)
            
                "We shall die to awken the Nation"- Bagha Jatin
                
                
            - Bengal me revolutionary acitivity ko promote karne wale newspaper the, Sandhya or Yugantar
            - Maharashtra me kaal. 
            
            
            
            
            
       Maharashtra : 
       
           - Sabse pehla kaand kiya tha, Vasudev Balwant Phadke ne , 1879 me. Ye itna jor se phadke ki, Ramosi peasant Force bankar tayyar ho gayi---> Inka plan tha armed revolt karne ka. 
           
           - 1890s me, Tilak ne Militant Nationalism propagate kiya, through Ganapat and Shivaji Festivals and his journals, Kesari and Maharatta. 
           
           - Tilak ke 2 saathiyo---> Chaplekar bhais--> Damodar and Balakrishna ne Poona ke Raand naam ke Plague Commissioner ki Gaand maar di, in 1897. 
           
           
           
           - Savarkar or unke bhai ne Mitra Mela organise kiya--> Ye ek secret society thi, in 1899---> Ye baad me Abhinav Bharat ke saath merge ho gayi in 1904. 
           
           - Iske baad, Nasik, Poona or Bombay---> Emerge hue, as centres of Bomb Manufacture. 
           
           
           - Abhinav bharat ke ek member, Anant Lakshman Kanhere ne A.M.T Jackson naam ke Indologist, ko India ke baar me gyan de diya, uski gand maar ke. 
           
           
           
           
           
           
           
           
      Punjab
      
          - Lala ne 'Punjabee' start kiya, or Bhagat singh ke uncle, Ajit singh ne Anjuman-i-Mohisban-i-watan naam ki extremist organisation start ki, in LaWhore. 
          
          - Agar haider, Syed Haider Raza, Bhai Parmanand, or radical Urdu poet, Lalchand Falak, bhi aise hi leaders the. 
          
          - Lekin, 1907 me hi Government ne Extremeism ki hawa nikaal di. 
          
          - Political meetings par ban lag gaya or Lala and Ajit ko deport kar diya gaya.      
           
          - Iske baad, Ambarprasad, Lalchand, Bhai Parmanand, Lala Hardyal etc, Full-scale Revolutionaries ban gaye. 
          
           
           
          1st World War ke time, Rashbehari Bose Ghadr Revolution ka leading figue tha. 
           
              1913, me Bose or Jatin mile, to discuss an armed uprising like 1857. 
              
             
             
             
             
             
              
           
           
           
      Abroad me kaand : 
      
      
          1) 1905 me London me Shyamji Krishnavarma ne---> Indian Home Rule league start ki, Jise India House bhi kehte the. 
          
              Indian students ke liye.   Radical youth ko scholorship par, India se bulate the. 
              
              Indian Sociologist naam ki journal chaapte the. 
              
              Savarkar or Hardyal, member the iske. 
              
              Inhi ka ek banda tha Madanlal Dhingra, jisne India Office ke babu, Curzon-Wyllie ko maar daala tha in 1909. 
              
              Iske baad, London khatarnaak ho gaya, Savarkar ko 1910 me extradite kar diya gaya, in NASIK CONSPIRACY CASE
              
               
       
         2) Paris or Geneva se Madam Bhikaji Cama, French socialists ke saath milke, Bande Matram chaapti thi. 
         
         
         
         3) Berlin me--> Virendranath chattopadhyaya
         
         
         
         
         
         
         
         
         
         
         
      GHADR
    
         
         
             San-Fransico me ek weeky newspaper publish hota tha--> The Ghadr
         
             Is group ne US coast ke along kai branches kholi. 
             
             Mainly ex-soldiers or peasants member the, jo Punjab se aaye the USA. 
             
             Lala Hardyal, 1911 me  pahoch gaye waha. 
             
             Is se pehle, Vancouver me 'Swadesh Sevak Home' or Seattle me 'United India House' establish ho chuka tha.
             
             Finally, 1913 me Ghadr establish hua.
             
             
             Members the :- Lala  Hardyal, Ramchandra, Bhagwan Singh, Kartar Singh Saraba, Barkatullah or Bhai Permanand. 
             
             Ye India me revolt lekar aane wale the. 
             
             Inhe encouragement mile 2 events se :- i) Komagata Maru   and   ii) WWI
             
             
             Komagata wale kaand se gusse me aake, Kartar Singh Saraba or Rahubar Dayal Gupta India aa gaye.   Yaha inhone Bengalee Revolutionaries se contact kiya---> Bose or Sanyal ko lead karne ko bola. 
             
             
             21 Feb ko Lahore, Rawalpindi or Ferozepur me armed revolt hone wala tha, Plan leak ho gaya. 
             
             
             Authorities ne Defence of India Rules, 1915 ke basis pe bohot gaand mari.    45 logo ko taang diya.   Bose Japan chale gaye .      Sachin Sanyal was transported for life. 
             
             
             
             
             
             
                  
             
             
             
    Europe 
        
         
         
           1915 me, Virendranath Chattopadhyay, Bhupendranath Dutta, Lala Hardyal etc ne German Foreign Office ke saath milke, 'Zimmerman Plan' ke under, Berlin Committee for Indian Independence banai thi.  
         
            NRI Indians + POWs ko uksake, India bhejo or revolt karwao. 
         
            1 mission--> Raja Mahendra Pratap Singh, Barkatullah or Obaidullah Sindhi ke under, Kabul gaya ek 'Provincial Indian Government' establish karne----> Afghan crown prince Amanullah ki madad se. 
            
            
        Singapore ki Mutiny
        
            Feb 15, 1915 ko ---- i) Punjabi Muslim 5th Light Infantry or ii) 36th Sikh Battalion ne Mutiny kar di--> Under, Jamadar Chisti khan, Jamadar Abdul Gani and Subedar Daud Khan. 
            
                
         
         
       First World War ke baad, log thode thande ho gaye, kyunki i) Prisoners ko release kar diya gaya ii) Montagu ne reforms ki guthli pakda di iii) Gandhi ki Entry
       
       
       1st WW me, Dono Moderates or Extremists ne Brits ka support kiya. Bas bechare revolutionaries the, jo ladte rahe. 
       
       
       
                        Lekin, Revolutionaries, ke alawa ek or group bhi tha, Jisne Brits ko oppose kiya, lekin Thang se, Organize hokar----> Home Rule League Moment. 
       
                   
                                 Leaders:- Tilak, Besant, G.S. Khaparde, The Hindu wala Iyer, Joseph Baptista and Jinnah(Yes, the snake himself)
                                 
                                       Alliance on the lines of Irish Home rule league             
                                 Objective: Home Rule, within British Commonwealth
       
       
                          Lekin kyu :
                          
                              
                               i) Nationalists ke ek section ko lagta tha ki, Government se consensus lene ke liye, Popular pressure dalna padega
                               
                              ii) Moderates, dillusioned ho gaye the Morley Minto reforms se 
                              
                             iii) Wartime miseries se logo ki mari padi thi
                             
                              iv) Wartime propaganda se Muh White Superiority ki myth khatam ho gayi thi
                              
                               v) Tilak ko release kae diya gaya tha jail se.
                               
                              vi) Annie Besant
                              
                               
                              
                              
                              
                              
                              
                       1915 se hi, Annie ne, India me self-GOv demand karne ke liye, Campaign lauch kar di thi. 
                       
                       'New India' or 'Commonweal' jaise newspapers + Publi Meethings ke through + Logo ko apni gori chut dikha dikhake, Annie ne convince kar diya tha, Self Rule ki demand karne ko. 
                       
                       1915 me INC ke annual session me, Tilak or Besant ne logo ko sex karne ka naya tareeka sikhaya. Tilak ne jail me rahke annie ko yaad kar, muth se dewaare bhar di thi. 
                       
                          Tilak ke naye moves dekh, moderates ka bhi khada ho gaya, or unhone Extremists ko wapas congress me bharti kar liya. 
                          
                          Lekin, COngress walo ko Annie ki chut itne pasand nahi aayi, isliye, uunhone Home Rule League ki scheme ko approve nahi kiya. 
                          
                          Lekin, Congress walo ne, Tilak ke naye chudai ke tareeke ko pure desh me sabko sikhane ke liye, Educaticve Propaganda ka programme start kiya, or local-level congress committees revive ki. 
                          
                          
                       
                       
                       
                       Ye sunke annie ki gand me aag lag gayi, or usne ultimatum de daala ki, BC agar tumne ye commintments implemnet nahi kiya, to wo khudki league start kardegi.  
                       Or jab koi response nahi aaya Khangresi kutto se, to Annie ne waisa hi kiya. 
                       
                    Annie ki chut marne ke liye, Tilak ne bhi aise show off ke liye apni League banai. 
                    
                    
                    
                    Tilak's league : 
                    
                    
                        i) Tilak ne 1916 me Indian HRL setup ki.  Iska HQ tha, Poona ka Belagaum shahar, jaha ke log, Be lagam hokar, chudai karte the. Tilak ne unhe lund pe contol karna sikhaya, even in the presence of White hoes. 
                        
                       ii) Tilak ki league, Maharashtra, Karnataka, CP or Berar me chalti thi.  
                       
                      iii) Lekin, Tilak ko Bombay me chudai se dar lagta tha, kyunki waha parsi log, apni aurato ki choot me Dhansak daal diya karte the chudai ke baad. 
                      
                      iv)  6  branches thi, or Demands thi : Swarajya, Formation of Linguistic states and Education in Vernacular.    Tialk ki English kamjor thi, isliye wo Linguistic states ki demand kartat tha. 
                      
                      
                      
                   Annie ki league :
                   
                      i) Annie ne, September 1916 me Madras me ALL-India HRL banai, kyunki Tilak Indian HRL par copyright claims ki strike karne laga tha. 
                      
                     ii) Iska coverage pure India me tha, even in Bombay, kyunki Annie ko dhansak khana pasand tha. 
                    
                    iii) Iski 200 Branches thi, kyunki Indian logo ko Gori aurat ki baate sun ne me maja aata tha, as comapred to some boring old dude with daddy issues. 
                    
                     iv) Annie ne apne Lover, George of the Jungle, Arundalle, ko league ka secy bana diya tha, malai maar ke. 
                     
                     v) Ek din jab George, jungle me bandar pakadne gaya tha, to piche se B.W. Wadia or C.P.Ramaswamy aa gaye, or Annie ki panties sungh muth marne lage.
                      Ye dekh Annie inta prabhavit hui, ki usne, in dono mutthal logo se hi league ka saara kaam karwaya. 
                     
                     
                        
              Home Rule league ka programme
              
              
                 1) Main kaam tha, logo ko Home rule as self-gov, ke sapne dikhana. 
                 
                 2) Ye Gujrat or Sindh ke backward areas tak, ye message le gaye. 
                 
                 3) Political Education,  Reading rooms, Libraries, dicussions, conferences, Classes for students, Newspapers me propaganda, Posters,  Plays, Religious songs etc ki madad se Annie ne randaap kiya. 
                 
                 4) 1917 ka Russian Revolution bhi bilkul theek time pe hua. 
                 
                 5) Ye sab dekh ke, baaki Muthmaru log bhi annie ki chut marne aa gaye :- 
                 
                                                                             a) Bada nehru aaya bade lund ke saath
                                                                             b) Chota Nehru aaya, chote lund ke saath
                                                                             c) Bhulabhai Desai, Annie ko bhul bhulaiya me le gaya, or gum hone ke bahane, annie ki panties sungh, muth maar ke so gaya
                                                                             d) Chittaranjan Das : Chitra banata tha, annie ki nangi body ko imagine karke
                                                                             e) K.M.Munshi : Paperwork karta tha, or kehta tha," Munshi hu ladki, chut me likh dunga apna naam, K.M naam hai mera, K.M naam hai mera " 
                                                                             f) B.Chakravarti : Ye bolta tha, ki ye pure India pe kabja kar Annie ko India ki rani bana dega, agar wo chut dene ke liye tayyar ho jaye to .
                                                                             g) Saiuddin Kitchlew : Ye mulla kitchen ware supply karne aaya tha annie ko, lekin annie ko kitchen me le jaake kuch or hi dikha gaya
                                                                             h) MMM : Ye Annie ko yaga or Shastra sikhane ke bahane, uska haath pakad apni lungi me daal diya karta tha or bolt tha," Mmmmmm" 
                                                                             i) Tej Bahadur Sapru : "Tej Bahadur Shaabji, Annie Madam, luli lelo, Annie madam lulli lelo"
                                                                             j) Lala Lajpat Rai : Ye MMM ka yaar tha, jise MMM ne bataya tha, "ja wo gori aayi hai, badi murkh hai, use yoga woga bolke, lode pe baitha le"
                                                                             
                                                                             
                6) Snake Jinnah bhi member tha, or ye Bomaby division a head ban gaya tha. 
                
                7) Bohot saare khangresi or Gokhle ke servants bhi, annie ki panty se aane wali khushbu sunghe ke liye, agitation me shamil ho gaye. 
                
                8) Lekin, Anglo-Indians, Mulle or Neech jaati ke log, Annie ki chut se aane wali khushbu ko kabhi appreciate hi nahi kar paye. 
                
                
                
                
                9) Govt. ko ye bilkul pasand nahi aaya ki koi Gori Randi, apni chut ki khushboo ke nashe me Indians ko Home Rule ka paath padha rahi hai.  Isliye, they came down with severe repressions. 
                
                10) Madras me students ko political meetings attend karne par ban laga diya. 
                
                11) Tilak ko Punjab or Delhi me enter hone se mana kar diya gaya, kyunki usne Naye farm laws ki bhu burai kar di thi, or khalistan Refrendum Tonti Tonti ki T-Shirt pahan ke bhashan de diye the. 
                
                12) 1917 me Annie, B.P Wadia or George Arundalle ko arrest kar liya gaya. 
                
                13) Sir Subramaniya Aiyar itna udas ho gaya ye sunke  ki ab use annie ki chut sunghne ka moka nahi milega to usne gusse me apna Knighthood renounce kar diya, bina ye soche ki BC use kabhi knighthood mila hi nahi tha. 
                
                14) Montagu ne wo shiva ko katne wali baat boli.                                                            
                                                                                       
                        
                        
                       
                       
                       
                         Lekin 1919 tak, Home Rule leage feeka pad gaya. 
                         
                         
                   1) Koi Effective organistaion nahi thi, kyunki jyadatar log, bas annie ki chut ki khusboo sunghne aaye the. 
                   
                   2) Mulle, Chut ki smell se bhadak uth te te, isliye, 1917-18 me communal riots hue. 
                   
                   3) Moderates, Montagu's statement of August 1917 se khush ho gaye the, or Goro ne bhi annie ko jail se chor diya, to khangress bolte, ab kya kareeinn...duhh. 
                   
                   4) Sept 1918 ke baad, extremist Passive resistance ki baate karne lage thi, jise sunke Moderates ki fat gayi. 
                   
                   5) Tialk case ke chakkar me, 1918 me Abroad chala gaya. 
                   
                   6) Gandhi ke aane se logo ka dhyan divert ho gaya. 
                   
                   
                             Gandhi bhi, 1920 me annie se milne aaya. Annie ne aate hi gandhi ko apni chut sunghane ki koshis ki, lekin Gandhi ne kaha, ye kya kar rahi hai kutiya.
                              Fir Gandhi ne, Annie ki chut par Anti-Fungal powder chidak diya, jis wajas se annie ki chut se smell aani band ho gayi.
                               Iske baad gandhi ne bola, " Abse ye Rand hui meri, or abse ye league bhi meri". 
                             
                               Gandhi ne Presidentship sambhali or league ka naam change kar---> Swarajya Sabha kar diya. 
                               
                               Or ek saal ke andar andar, Gandhi ne Silicon Valley ke challak VC ki tarah, league ko INC me merge kar diya. 
                               
                               
                  To aakhir league kya kya ukhaad payi : 
                  
                  
                     1) League, ek transition tha, Congress ke deliberative and Inactive nature or Gandhi ke mass involvement wale phase ke beech ka. 
                     
                     2) Is se emphasis shift ho gaya Masses par (educated elites se) 
                     
                     3) Kattar Nationalists ki puri ek generation tayyar hui. 
                     
                     4) Gandhian style politics ke liye logo ko tayyar kiya
                     
                     5) Montford reforms of 1917 bhi Home Rule agitation se influenced the. 
                     
                     6) Tilak-Annie ke karnaame ki wajah se moderates-extremists saath aa gaye the,in Luckon 1916. Jis se congress revive ho saki,as an effective instrument of Indian Nationalism  
                     
                     7) Is movement se National Movement me ek sense of urgnecy aaya. 
                     
                     
                     
                     
                     
            1916 wala wo Lucknow session : 
            
               - Annie ne Ambika Churan khila(Ambika charan majumdar tha president), Extremists ki entry karwai.
               
               - Iske pehle, P.Mehta or GKG mar gaye the. 
               
               - Is session me League ke saath Pact bhi hua: 
               
                                a) Dono ne Government ko common demand ki
                                
                                b) Is time, league me Younger militant nationalists dominate kar rahe the---Ye increasingly anti-imperialists the. 
                                
                                c) Britain ne Turkey ki madad karne se mana kar diya tha in Balkan wars(1912-13) and It's war with Italy(1911), jis se mulle bhadak uthe the. 
                                
                                d) Bengal ki partition ko bhi 1911 me annul kar diya gaya tha. 
                                
                                e) GoI ne Aligarh me University bananae se mana kar diya tha. 
                                
                                f) Young wale, purane ALigarh school se dur jana chahte the.          
                     
                                g) 1st WW me, GoI ne inki bhi gand mari thi :-   i) Maulana Azad ki Al Hilal , or Mohammad ali ki Comrade par ban laga.  ii) Ali brothers, Hasrat Mohani jaise leaders ko jail bheja
                                
                         Pact: 
                                 i) Congress ne seperate electorates accept kar liye---> Would continue till one community demand joint electorates.  Mullo ko fixed proportions me seat bhi mil gayi thi dono levels pe.        
                     
                     
                     
                     
            Montagu ne 20 August 1917 ko House of Commons me statement di :- Ise August decleration of 1917 kehte hain. 
            
               
                    " Govt ki policy hai, Increasing particitpation of Indians in every branch of administration and gradual development of self-governing insists, jo aage chalke, responsible gov. in India as an integral part of British empire ban sakte" 
                    
                         
                        Iske baad se, 'Self-Gov' or Swaraj ki baat seditious nahi rahi.                                              
                       
                       Lekin, itne sab ke baad bhi INC ko to lode dikhane hi the kyunki : 
                          
                              a) Koi specific time frame nahi diya gaya tha
                              b) Akeli gov ko hi decide karna tha, nature, timing of advance , responsible gov ki taraf. Matlab, gore decide karenge, Indians ke liye, kya sahi hai kya galat. 
                       
                       
                       
                       
                       
                       
                       
             1919 se 1939 ke time ko : Era of Mass nationalism kehte hain.           
                          
                          Reason: 
                          
                                  a) 1st WW ke bbad, nationalist activity me resurgence hua, India or baaki colonies me bhi. 
                                  
                                  b) Gandhi ke aane ke baad, Indian struggle, decisively broad based popular struggle ban gayi. 
                                 
                                  c) Sab sections ki chudi padi thi, due to hardship after the war : 
                                  
                                        i) Industry : Price increase hone se, Recession aane se, Foreign investment se kaafi industries closure ya loss ke brink pe thi. 
                                        
                                       ii) Workers/Artisans: Berojgari, High price
                                       
                                      iii) Peasantry : High Taxation + Gareebi
                                      
                                       iv) Soldiers : Ye puri duniya ki sair kar aaye, or aake logo ko bhadkaya
                                       
                                        v) Educated urban classes : Berojgari + Racism 
                                        
                                 d) India ne jo contribution kiya tha, uski wajah se expectations kaafi high thi.        
                                                                    
                                 e) Ladai ke time, ek dusre par colonial powers ne khoob keechad uchala. 
                                 
                                 f) Lekin Paris Peace conference etc se clear ho gaya ki BC Ye sab milke pagal bana rahe hain randi ke bachhe. 
                                 
                      
                      
                      
                     
                     
                     
                     
                  Government of India act, 1919
                  
                  
                     1) Provinces me dyarchy introduce kar di gayi--- For the executive 
                     
                                     - Rule of 2 = Executive councillors and popular ministers.    Governor, province ka executive head tha
                                     
                                     - Subjects 2 list me devided the: 'Reserved'---> Law and order, FInance, Land Revenue, Irrigation etc 
                                                                       ' Trnasfered'-> Education, Heath, local government, Industry, agri, excise etc
                                                                       
                                                                       
                                                                       Reserved subjects ko bas governor admin. karta tha, through his executive council of bureaucrats
                                                                       
                                                                       
                                                                       Transfered subjects--> From among the elected members of legislative council. 
                                                                       
                                                                       
                                     - Ministers responsible honge, legislature ko----> resign karna hoga, agar no-confidence motion pass ho gaya to 
                                     
                                     - Executive councillors, responsible nahi the. 
                                     
                                     - Consit. Machinery ke fail hone par, Governoe, transfered subjects ka admin bhi apne under le sakta tha. 
                                     
                                     - Secy of state for India or GG, reserved subjects me lund ada sakte the, lekin transfer wale me lund adane itna aasan nahi tha. 
                                     
                                     
                                     
                                     
                                     
                       2. Provincial legislative councils ko expand kar diya gaya, or 70% members, elected hone the. 
                       
                       3) Class + communal legislature ke system ko or bhi consolidate kiya gaya. 
                       
                       4) Aurato ko vote karne ka adhikar
                       
                       5) Governor bills ko veto kar sakta tha, or ordinances issue kar sakta tha. 
                       
                       6) Legislative councils, budget ko reject kar sakti thi, lekin Governor chahta to, restore kar sakta tha. 
                       
                       7) Legislatures ko Freedom of speech de di gayi. 
                       
                       
                       
                       
                       8) Central Government me koi Responsible Government nahi aayi. 
                       
                       
                           1 Governor General hi Chief Executive authority tha
                           
                           2 Admin. ko 2 lists me divide kar diya gaya-  Central and Provincial 
                             
                                 Viceory ki 8 logo ki executive council me 3 indians hone the. 
                                 
                                 GG ke pass, provinces me reserved subjects par full contol tha
                                 
                                 GG, ordinances issue kar sakta tha, Bills ko certify ya reject kar sakta tha etc.
                                 
                                 
                      9) Central Legislature : Bicameral kar di----> Lower house ko Central Legislative assembly kehte the---> isme 145 members the---> 104 elected
                                                                     Upper house ko Council of State bolte the---------------> Isme 60 members the----> 34 elected                             
                                      
                                       Council of State ka tenure 5 saal ka tha, or bas Aadmi log allowed the. 
                                       										[uLTA bc]
                                       Central Legislative council ka tenure 3 saal tha. 
                                       
                                       
                              Legislatures, questions puch sakte the, supplies bhi, Adjournment motions pass kar sakte the, Budjet ke ek part par vote bhi kar sakte the( LoL, only 25% part par)
                              
                                     
                                     
                    10) Britain me bhi kuch changes hue is act se: 
                    
                           a) Secretary of State, ki tankhwa, British log pay karne wale the. 
                           
                        
                        
                        
                        Itna sab dene ke baad bhi, bohot kuch nahi diya tha : 
                        
                           i) Limited franchise:- 26 crore population thi, lekin electorate bas 10 lakh logo tak extend kiya gaya tha. 
                           
                          ii) Centre me legislature ka Viceory ki gandi harkato par koi contol nahi tha, VIceroy, Parliamnet me khada hokar, lund dikhata tha logo ko
                          
                         iii) Division of subjects bhi satisfactory nahi the. 
                         
                          iv) Provinces ko unki importance ke hisab se Central legislature me seats di gayi thi: Punjab- Military ; Bombay- COmmercial importance. 
                          
                           v) Provincial level pe to kya gand failaya tha: Irrigation, Finance, Police, press, justice jaise subjects bhi 'reserved' the. 
                           
                          vi) Provincial ministries ka, Finances or babu log, par sala koi contol hi nahi tha.                  
                                     
                                     
                                     
                                                                       
                COngress wale, ye 'Reform' dekh ke aag se bhar gaye.   August 1918 me ek special session organise kiya gaya, under Hasan Imam's presidency. --> "Disappointing" and "Unsatisfactory".
                
                                                                       
                                                                          
                     
     Gandhi : 
     
      
         Birth: 2 October, 1860---> Bahadur Shah zafar ke marne ke 7 saal baad. 
         
         Stayed in South africa till 1914                
                     
                     
                     South Africa me baapu ne kai kaand kiye : 
                     
                        I. Moderate Pahse of Struggle, 1894-1906
                        
                            - South Africa or Britain me authorities ko petitions/memorials bheje. 
                            - Indians ko unite karne ke liye, Natal Indian Congress setup ki, or Indian Opinion naam ka paper start kiya. 
                            
                            
                     
                      II. Passive resistance ki baari, Bitches (1906-1914)
                      
                      
                             - Passive resistance or Civil disobediance karna start kiya, jise Satyagraha ka naam diya gaya
                             
                             - Registration Certificates(1906) ke khilaf satyagraha :  Govt. ne sabko jail me fek diya, jo koi bhi khudko register nahi karwa raha tha. 
                              
                                                                                        Jab govt. ne jab jabardasti register kiya, to Gandhi etc ne milke, Registration certificates ko publicaly burn kar diya. 
                                                                                        
                                                                                        
                             - Indian migration par resitriction ke against Campaign.  
                             
                             - Poll tax and Invalidation of Indian Marriages ke against campaign. 
                             
                             - Transvaal Immigration act ke against Protest. 
                             
                             
                             
                     Gandhi ko South Africa se kya seekh mili : 
                     
                     
                         i) Masses ke pass, immense capacity thi, ek cause me participate or sacrifice karne ki, that moved them. 
                         
                        ii) Bohot saare sections ko unite kiya jaa sakta hai. 
                        
                       iii) Kai times, aise aate hain, jab leaders ko aise decions lene padte hain, jo uske supporters ke liye unpopular hote hain. 
                       
                        iv) Khudki style of leadership and politics develop kar li bhai ne.         
                             
                             
               Satyagrah:  Based on Truth and non-violence ---> Indian elements + Christian requirements of Turning the other cheek  +  Tolstoy ki philosophy---> Evil could be best countered by non-violent resistance
               
                  
                  
                                    1) Satyagrahi, kisi bhi cheej ke liye submit nahi karega, jo use galat lage-----> But hamesha, Truthful, non-violent or fearless rahega. 
                                    
                                    2) Satyagrahi, Cooperation or boycott ke principle par kaam karega
                                    
                                    3) Methods of Satyagrahi : Non-Payment of taxes, Declining honours and positions of authoriy. 
                  
                                    4) Wrong doer ke khilaf nafrat nahi karni hai. 
                                    
                                    5) Satyagrahi, kahi evil ke aage nahi jhukega, whatever the consequences
                                    
                                    6) Bas, Brave or Strong hi Satyagraha ko practice kar sakte hain. 
                                    
                                    7) Thoughts ko practice se seperate nahi kar sakte---> Matlab, ends could not justify means. 
                                    
                                    
                                    
                                    
                                    
                                    
                                    
                                    
                          Gandhi wapas aa gaya, 1915 me India.  Agle ek saal tak, Bharat Darshan kiya.    Is pure time, koi position nahi li, on any political matter. 
                          
                             Lekin ye Home Rule League ke khilaf tha, kyunki World War I chal raha tha. 
                             
                             Bhai ne bola, ki wo koi bhi political organisation nahi join karega, jabtak, wo organisation bhi non-violent satyagraha ke method ko accept nahi kar leti. 
                             
                             
                    
                    
             1917 or 1918 ke beech, bapu 3 struggles me involved the : CAK
             
             
                    
                    
                 Champaran: 1st Civil Disobedience : ---->        Rajkumar Shukla ke kehne par, Bihar ke Champaran chale gaye, to look into the problems of Indigo farmers. 
                 
                                                                  Euro Planters, tikathia system force karte the--> Grow Indigo on 3/20 part of total land.    
                     
                                                                  19th CE ke end me, jab Synthetic dye aa gayi, to sale planters, high rent or illegal dues demand karne lage. Or saale fix price pe kharred te the. 
                    
                    
                    
                      Bapu ke saathi : Rajendra Prasad, Mazhar-ul-Haq, Mahadeo Desai, Narhari Parekh or J.B.Kriplani
                      
                      Waha pahonchne par, Authorities ne order kiya to leave the area at once. 
                      
                      Iski order ko defy kiya and faced the punishment---> Yahi tha passive resistance/ Civil disobedience
                    
                      Iske baad Authorities ne U Turn le liya--> Allowed gandhi to make an enquiry. 
                      
                      Gov ne ek committee apoint ki , or Gandhi ko uska member bana diya. 
                      
                      
                      
                      
                      
               Ahmedabad Mill Strike(1918) : Pehli Bhookh hadtaal :   Cotton mill owners or workers ke beech ka dispute, over discontinuation of plague bonuses.                           
                    
                                                                      Gandhi ne workers ko bola, 50 nahi, 35% increase in wages demand karo. Jab demand met nahi hui, to bapu bhi bhook hadtaal par chale gaye. 
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                    
               Kheda Satyagraha(1918) : Pehla Non-Cooperation :---> Sukhe ki wajah se crops fail ho gaye.   Revenue code ke hisab se agar yield, 1/4th of normal produce se kam the, to farmers ko remission mil sakta tha.      
                    
                                       
                                                                     Sarkar chahti thi, ki tax na dene par properties sieze kar li jaye. 
                                                                     
                                                                     Bapu ne bola tax mat dena. 
                                                                     
                                                                     
                                                                     Bapu ke saathi: Sardar patel, Narhari Parikh, Mohanlal Pandya, Ravi Shankar Vyas 
                                                                     
                                                                     
                                                                     
                                                                     
                                                                     
               Montford reforms ke just 6 mahine pahle, Brits ne Defence of India Regulations act, 1915 ka ek extension pass kiya--> Jise Aanarchial and Revolutionary Crimes  Act, kehte the .    
               
                  Lekin, Iska popular naam tha---> Rowlatt act.                                      
                                
                                
                             Ise Rowlatt commssion ki recommenation par pass giya gaya tha, jiska chairman tha Sir Sidney Rowlatt--> To Investigate seditious conspiracy of Indian people.                                         
                                                                     
                              Imperial legislative assembly ke saare Elected members ne ise oppose kiya tha, lekin wo majority me nahi the, isliye jhant nahi ukhad paye. 
                              
                              Iski wajah se---All the elected members including MMM, Mazhor Ul Haq and even the Snake Jinnah himself, resigned in protest.                                   
                                                                     
                              Bina trial ke arrest karo, or bina juries ke trials.   Bina warrant ke arrest karo, on the mere suspicion of 'treason'.                                        
                                                                     
                                                                     
                                                                     
                   WWI ke baad Indians soch rahe the, sala ab to finally kuch achaa karenge, lekin unhe badle me Rowlatt act mila. Is wajas se sabki gaand me aag lag gayi. 
                   
                   
                   Gandhi ne ise "Black act" kaha, or ALl India level pe mass protest karne ko bola. 
                   
                   
                   Lekin, protest me logo par khub lath mare gaye. Isliye, Gandhi ne Satyagraha Sabha bulwai, or Home Rule league ke logo ko bhi ikattha kar liya. Even pan-islamists tak ko bula liya gaya. 
                   
                   Form of Protest: Nation wide hartal + Fasting and Prayer + Civil disobedience against specific laws + Courting arrests and imprisonment
                   
                   
                        i) Is sab se masses ko direction mil gaya 'act' karne ke liye
                        
                       ii) Ab se Peasants, artisans or urban gareeb bhi, struggle me increasingly important role play karne wale the. 
                       
                      iii) National Movement ka orientation, puri tarah se masses ki taraf turn ho gaya. 
                      
                      
                      6th April,1919 ko satyagraha launch hona tha.  Lekin is se pehle hi, specially punjab me , log bhayanak bhadak gaye.   Punjab ka LG, aircrafts se logo par bomb fenkne laga. 
                      
                      
                      Amritsar was the worst affected, therefor Jallianwala Bagh massacre took place on 13th April, 1919. 
                   
                                                  - 2 leader (Saiuddin kitchlew and Dr Satyapal) ko arrest kar liya gaya tha.                   
                   
                            Rabindranath Tagor ne protest me apna knighthood lota diya, ye soche bina ki use to kabhi knighthood mila hi nahi tha. 
                            
                            Gandhi ne Kesar-i-Hind ka title lauta diay, ye soche bina hi ki Pure kathiawar ke kisbhi bhi insaan ko aisa koi title kabhi diya hi nahi gaya tha. 
                   
                            Jallianwala Bagh massacre ke time, Bhagat singh was only 11. 
                   
                            Uddham singh ne 1940 me, Michael O'Dwyer ko goli mari. 
                   
                   
                            Enquiry ke liye, Hunter committe bani. Ise officially, Disorders inquiry committee kahte the.  Is committee me 3 dalle bhi the :- Chimanalal ki chut lal, Harilal Setalvad
                            
                                                                                                                                                               Pandit Faggot narayan
                                                                                                                                                               
                                                                                                                                                               Sardar bhi Sahibzada bhi, Sultan lulla Ahmed khan
                                                                                                                                                               
                                                                                                                                                               
                                           Hunter committee ne Dyer par koi Penal ya Disciplinary action bhi nahi liya.                                                                                                                
                                                                                                                                                               
                                     Or BC proceedings start hone se pehle hi, Government ne Indemnity Act pass kar diya tha, apne officers ko protect karne ke liye.  Ise Moti ne khub criticize kiya tha.             
                   
                   
                                                                     
                                                    Lekin, And I kid you not, Golden Temple ke Clergy Arur Singh ne Dyer ko Sikh Declare kar diya tha. 
                                                    
                                                       (Or ye ek bada reason tha, ki Management of Sikh shrines ko reform karne ki demand intense ho gayi---> Is se hi Gurudwara reform movement start hua tha). 
                                                       
                                                       
                                                                        
                                                                     
                                             INC ne khudki ek committee banayi : Moti +  C.R. Das + Abbas Tyabji + M.R.Jayakar and Gandhi.                          
                                    
                                                                                         
                                    
                                    
                 
                 
                 
              Khilafat Committee ke members: ALi Bhais(Shaukat Ali and Muhammad Ali) ,  Maulana Azad,  Ajmal kasa...I mean Khan and HasRat Mohani   
                 
                 Pehle to ye saale, bas petitions wagarh hi karte rahe, lekin November 1919 me All India Khilafat Conference ki Delhi me hui meeting me inhone British Goods ko Boycott karne ka plan bana liya. 
                 
                 
                 Gandhi President tha All India Khilafat committee ka. 
                 
                 
                          Tilak against tha, is chutiyaap ke + Tilak ko Satyagrah bhi bakloli ke alawa kuch nahi lagta tha.  Baaki INC wale bhi thode sceptical the, mostly Council entry ke opposition ko lekar. 
                          
                          Lekin, Gandhi ne Apna loincloth upar kiya, or Sabko baari baari se apna lemon taste karwaya jis se sab ready ho gaye. 
                          
                                  May 1920 me Turkey se Treaty of Sevres sign hone ke baad, Turkey ko completely dismember kar diya gaya. 
                                  
                                  June 1920 me ek All-Party conference bulai gayi, Allahbad me, jaha Boycott of schools, colleges and law courts ka programme approve hua. Or Gandhi ko lead karne ko bola gaya. 
                                    
                                  August 31, 1920 :- Khilafat committee ne non-cooperation campaign start ki, or movement was formally launched. 
                                  
                                  Sept 1920 : Congress ke Calcutta session me(Obviously), Congress ne non-cooperation programme ko approve kar diya, till Punjab and Khilafat wrongs are not removed and Swaraj was established.   
                                    
                                  December, 1921: Congress ke Nagpur session me, ek change hua : Instead of ataining swaraj by Consti. means----> Attaining swaraj through peaceful and legitimate means(Matlab extra consti tareeke ) 
                                  
                                               
                                    Congress me kuch organisational Changes kiye gaye : 15 members ki congress working committee banayi gayi, jo congress ko aage se lead karegi. 
                                                                                        Provincial Congress committees banayi gayi, on linguistic basis.                           
                                    
                                       Gandhi ne bola tha ki agar non-cooperation programme implement hua to Swaraj 1 saal me hi aa jayega. LoL. 
                                       
                                       
    Is stage me ye sab fattu log congress chor ke farar ho gaye :- Annie(apni jawani bachane ke liye),G.S Kharpade(ke gand pe laat na pade isliye), B.C.Pal (BC pal bhi chala gaya ?),And yeah, the Snake Jinnah himself                
                                       
     Fuddu Bengalle BC in sabka bhi baap nikla or us chode ne khudka hi ek naya organisation bana liya: Indian National Liberal Federation                                 
                                    
                                    
                                    
                                    
                  
                  
                  Gandhi tour kar raha tha pure desh ka. Jaha jaata, mulle allah hu akbar karte. 
                  
                  800 naye schools or colleges khul gaye :-- Acharya Narendra Dev,  C.R. Das,  Lala,  Zakir Hussain,   Subhash Bose(Ye bhai, Calcutta ke National College ke princi ban gaye) etc     
                  
                       - Aligarh ki Jamia millia,   Kashi Vidyapeeth,   Gujrat VIdyapeeth,   and Bihar Vidyapeeth. 
                  
                  
                  
                  Lawyers berojgaar ho gaye: Chota + Bada Nehru,  C.R.Das,   C. Rajagopalachari,  J Sai Fuddi in Kithlew kitchenware wala,   Patel,  ASaf ali,   T.Prakasam and    Rajendra Prasad. 
                  
                  
                  Clothes ka import aadha ho gaya, kyunki aurate sexy ho gayi thi, or unhone kapde pahan na hi chor diya, baaki rahi sahi kasar aadmio ne kapde jalake puri kar di. 
                  
                  Videshi Daaru bechne walo ki Shops picket ki jaane lagi. BC aadhe log, to daaru pine hi aaye the protest me. 
                  
                  Tilak Swaraj Fund me 1 crore Rs jama ho gaye----> Ye kaha gaye, ye kisi ko nahi pata. 
                  
                  COngress Volunteer corps bani---> Jo parallel police ka kaam karti thi.               
                             
                             
                             
                  1921 me, ALi Bhaiyo ne Mussala Afraad ko kaha ki wo Army chor dein. Mullo ne army to nahi chori, lekin Ali Bhaiyo ko British jail me khub sotte pade. 
                  
                  Bengal ke Mindanpore or Andhra Pradesh ke Guntur me pehle se hi Union Board Taxes ke against No-Tax campaign chal raha tha.            
                  
                  Assam ke Tea Plantations, Steamer services or Assam-Bengal Railways me Strikes organise karwai, J.M Sengputa ne. 
                  
                  
                  November, 1921 me jab sala Prince of wales India aaya to Strikes or Demonstrations se uska svagat kiya gaya. 	
                  
                  
                  Isi bandwagon me shaamil hokar, bohot saare local struggles bhi start ho gaye :-    Awadh Kisan Movemebt (UP)
                  
                                                                                                      Eka Movement (UP)
                                                                                                      
                                                                                                      Mappila Revolt ( Malabar) 
                                                                                                      
                                                                                                      Sikh-Mahant Agitation in punjab
                                                                                                      
                                                                                                      
                  
                    Middle class wale, pehle to josh me aa gaye. Fir, bohot jaldi hi unki hawa nikal gayi. 
                    
                    
                    Calcutta, Bombay, Madras jaise bade shahar, jo elite politicians ke gadh the---> Gandhi ki call ka response kaafi feeka tha. 
                    
                    
                    Govt. Services se resignation ko bhi kisi ne seriously nahi liya.   Titles ke surrender hone ko bhi kisi ne seriously nahi liya. 
                    
                    
                    
                    
                    
                    Lekin kaafi naye neta ubhar ke aaye : 
                    
                      i) Bihar me Rajendra Prasad
                      
                     ii) Gujrat me Vallabhbhai patel
                     
                     
                    
                    
               Economic boycott se business class ko kaafi fayda hua.  Lekin, kuch ko labour unrest se takleef bhi hui. 
               
               
               Peasants ka participation to massive tha.
               
               Bihar me, 'Sacred thread a.k.a Janeu' wale chutiyaap ki wajas se Upper or lower caste ke beech khub mukaa laaat hui. 
               
                    
               Student log, as usual kaafi josh me aagaye the. Bohot saaro ne school college chor diya, or national schools/colleges join kar liye.  
               
                 Gujrat ka Kashi Vidyapeeth or Jaila milia jaise instis me bhar gaye log. 
                 
                 
               Aurato ne purdah chor diya, or apne jewarat bech, Tilak-Swaraj fund me paise jama karwa diya.    Liquor shops ki picketing ki. 
               
               
               Hindu-Mulla unity. 
               
               
               Gandi or Viceroy reading ke beech tu-tu mai-main hui, kyunki, Gandhi ne Ali Brothers ki violent speeches ko condemn karne se mana kar diya. 
               
               
               Volunteer corps ko illegal declare kar diya gaya.   Public meetings ko ban kar diya gaya.   Press ko Gagg kiya gaya.    Gandhi ko 'His majest's hospitality provide ki gayi'. 
               
               
               
               
               
               
               Is wajas se baaki Khangresi, Gandhi par pressure dalne lage, CDM start karne ke liye. 
               
               Feb, 1922 me Gandhi ne dhamki di, ki saala him Civil disobedience launch kar denge Bardoli se agar : i) Political prisoners ko nahi chora gaya  ii) Press control nahi hataya gaya  
               
               Lekin, aisa kuch ho pata us se pehle hi movement par brakes lag gaye, Because of...You know what it is. 
               
               
                  Chauri-Chaura Incident: 
                  
                    UP ke GOrakhpur ka chota sa ye gaanv----> 5th Feb, 1922----> 22 police walo ko jala diya gaya. 
                    
                    Gandhi ki fat gayi. 
                    
                    CWC ne Feb, 1922 me Bardoli me meeting ki, or  Sari activities par rok laga di. 
                       Instead unhone constructive work naam ke faggot pana start kar diya : Promotion of Khadi,   Natioanl Schools,  Hindu Muslim Unity,   Untouchability
                       
                       
                       
                       
                       March 1922 me Gandhi ko arrest kar, 6 saal ke liye jail bhej diya gaya. 
                       
                       
                       
                       November, 1922 me Khilfat ki bhi maa chud gayi, Jab Mustafa kamal Pasha ke under, logo ne milke, Sultan ko koda kar liya. 
                       
                            1924 me Caliphate hi abolish kar di gayi. LoL. 
                            
                            
                            
                       
                       
                       
                       
             Gandhi ke arrest hone ke baad sab log depression me chale gaye. Nehru to Emo logo ki tarah Green Day ki playlist sunta rehta tha 24 ghante. 
             
               Congressmen ko samajh nahi aa raha tha ki karein to kya karein. 
               
              Ek section tha, CR Das, Moti and Ajmal Khan ka---> Jo chahte the, ki Legislative councils ke boycott ko khatm kiya jaye, taki nationalists assemblies me ghuskar unki weakness bata sake logo ko. 
              
                 Ye logo ko ' Swarajists' bulaya jane laga. 
                 
              Ek or School of thought tha--> Led by C.Rajagopalachari, Patel , Rajendra Prasad and M.A.Ansari----> 'No-changers'----> Ye to council entry ko oppose karte the. Contructive work karne me inhe maja aata tha. 
              
                  Ye boycott or non-cooperation ko continue karna chahte the---> Or suspended Civil disobedience programme ke liye, chup chaap preparation karna chahte the. 
                  
                  
                  
                  
             Gaya Session me Swarajists ki maa chud Gaya:    Moti or uske C.R.Das ne, gusse me Congress ki secy or president ke post se resign kar diya. 
             
                In dono ne fir milke : Congress-Khilafat Swarajya Party a.k.a Swarajists party bana li---> Das president tha, or Moti secy tha. 
                
                
                
              Swarajists kya sochte the: 
              
                 1) Coucil entry apni taraf hai, or Non-Cooperation apni taraf hai.=====> Ye bas hum ek naya Front khol rahe hain. 
                 
                 2) Political vaccum ke time me, Council work se logo ka morale boost hoga. Plus, GoI apne chode, nahi thoos payegi councils me. 
                 
                 
                 3) Councils, political struggle ka ek arena ban jayegi
                 
                 
                 
                 
           No-Changers kya sochte the: 
           
              1) Parliamentary work me lag gaye, to constructive work tumhara baap karega. 
              
              2) Revolutionary zeal khatm ho jayega. 
              
              3) Political Corruption aa jayega. 
              
              4) Constructive work se hi hum, next stage ke liye prepare kar sakte hain.       
                 
                 
                 
                 
                 
          Lekin, dono sides, 1907 jaisa split nahi chahti thi, Or dono hi Gandhi ke touch me thi, jo jail me baitha khudko touch kiya karta tha.        
                 
            Dono sides, ko ye bhi pata tha, ki BC agar koi reforms chahiye, to united front present karna hoga GoI ko. 
            
            Dono Sides, Gandhi ko hi leader mante the, ek United Nationalist front ka. 
            
            Dono Factors ko dhayn me rakhte hue, Sept, 1923 ki meeting me ek compromise hua : 
            
                  i) Ja Moti ja, ladle apne chunav(as a group within Congress)
                  
              November, 1923 me CLA or Provincial assemblies ke elections hue. 
              
              
              
          Elections me Swarajists ---> 141 elected seats me se 42 jeet gaye.    CP ki provincial asembly me clear majority.      (Jinnah or MMM, Independent chunav lade the)    
              
              
              
          1924 me Revolutionary terrorism ki wajah se GoI ne Swarajists ki bhi gand marna shuru kar di. Isliye, Gandhi ko unpe daya aa gayi. Pehle wo inke against tha. 
          
          
          December, 1924 ko Belgaum Session me ye decide hua ki---> Swarajists would work in COuncils as an Integral part of the congress. 
          
             [Belgaum Session pehla or akhri session tha, jisme Gandhi ne, preside kiya]
             [Gandhi ne Belagam hokar, maa bahan ki gaaliyan di, Pehle to Swarajists ko , Fir government ko, Fir swarajists ko gale laga diya, or Moti ko apna lemon taste karwa diya]
             
             
             
             
             
        Lekin, thode time me hi, Swarajists me bhi randaap shuru ho gaya religion ko leke: 
        
          i) Responsivists: Lala, MMM, N.C.Kelkar----> GoI se cooperate karo, jab ho sake office hold karo---> Hindu-Intersts ko protect karne ke liye. 
          
             Ye Moti, ko beef eater bilate the
             
          
           In logo ki wajah se, Swarajists ne Bengal tenants ka support kho diya, jo jyadatar mulle the, kyunki inhone Hindu zamindars ko support kiya.      
             
             
         ii) C.R. Das bhi 1925 me shaheed ho gaya( RiP)
         
         
        iii) Isliye, 1926 me, Swarajists bolte, fuck this shit, we out.    Or unhone dobara se ma Ma Mass Civil Disobedience me apna faith kayam kiya, or Legislatures se withdrew ho gaye. 
      
      
        iv) Or jo chode swarajists, abhi bhi nahi chor rahe the, wo 1926 me dobara chunav lade, or apni gand marwa li.   
         
              UP, CP or Punjab me they were completely routed. 
         
                 
         v) Finally, 1930 me CDM start hone par(Purna Swaraj Resolution of Lahore Congress) se, Swarajists finally walked out. 
         
         
         
           Swarajista kya ukhaad paye : 
           
           
                i) Apen coalition partners ke saath milkar, inhone GoI ko kai baar out-vote kiya---> Budgetary grants, Adjournment motions etc ke matters par. 
                
               ii) Powerful speeches di, Self-Government, Civil liberties or Industrialisation par
               
              iii) Vithalbhai patel, ko 1925 me Central Legislative assembly ka speaker banaya gaya. 
              
              
               iv) 1928, me Public Safety bill ko defeat kiya gaya----> Jo socialist foreigners ko bahar rakhne ke liye banaya gaya tha. 
               
               
                v) Apni activities se inhone, Political vacuum fill kiya, us time pe, jab National Movement dobara apni strength gain kar rahi thi. 
                
                
               vi) MOntford scheme ki hollowness, ko expose kiya
               
              vii) Demonstrate kiya ki coucils ko bhi useful work ke liye use kiya ja sakta hai. 
              
              
              
              
              
        1920s me ek or badi development hui:-   Socialists betichod
        
        
        
        1) Congress ke andar hi, Jawaharlal nehru or Subhash Bose, Leftist vichaardhara le aaye. 
        
        2) Ye younger nationalists, Swarajists or No-changers, dono ke critical the. 
        
        3) Ye jyada consistent anti-imperialist line adopt kare hue the, in the form of slogan of 'purna swaraj'. 
        
        4) International scenes me kya ho raha hai, ye us se aware the. 
        
        5) Nationlism + anti-imperialism ko Social justice se combine karna chahte the,   Iske saath saath ye Internal class oppression by capitalists and landlords ki baate karte the. 
        
        
        
     1920 me M.N Roy or Abani Mukherjee ne milke, Tashkent me Communist Party of India(CPI) banai.   (2nd COngress of Commintern ke baad) .   
        
        
     1924 me bohot saare commie kutto ko jail hui in Kanpur Bolshevik Conspiracy case:- S.A.Dange, Muzaffar Ahmed,  Shaukat Usmani,  Nalini Gupta,     
        
        
     1925 me Kanpur me Indian Communist Conference hui, which laid the foundation of CPI
     
     1929 me, Meerut Conspiracy case me, 31 leading commie kutto ko jail hui. 
     
     Marxist and communist propaganda failane ke liye, Workers and Peasants parties organise ki gayi, pure bharat me. 
     
     Lekin, ye sab parties, National Movement ke andar hi the, or Congress ke saath hi kaam karte the. 
     
     
     
     
     
     1928 me Chote nehru ne All Bengal's Students' conference ko preside kiya. 
     
     
     UP me peasants ko brainwash karke, agitations karwaye gaye, tenancy laws ko revise karne ke liye, evictions se bachne ke liye, Karje se relief ke liye. 
     
     
     Similar chutiyaap hua, Andhra ke Rampa me,, Rajastha me,,,, oR Bombay and Madras ke ryotwari areas me. 
     
     
     Patel ne Bardoli Satyagraha kiya, 1928 me. 
     
     
     
     
     
     
     1920 me AITUC ke ban ne se Trade Union movement start hua.   Lala iska pehla president ban gaya, or isne Dewan Chaman lala ki gand lal, ko iska pehla General Secy bana diya. 
     
       In chodo ne milke strikes karwai : i) Kharagpur Railway Workshop me  ii) Tata Iron and Steel works(Jamshedpur) me   iii) Bombay ki textile mills me  iv) Buckingham Carnatic Mills me. 
       
       1923 me Madras me India ka pahla Mayday celebrate kiya gaya. 
       
       
     
          
     
     
     
     
     Jab ye sab ho raha ho, Tab Caste wale chode kaha shaant baithne wale the : 
     
       1) Justice Party : Madras
       
       2) Self-Respect movement(1925) under, Periyar E.V.Ramaswamy Naicker (Madras)
       
       3) Satyashodhak Acitivists in Satara (Maharashtra)
       
       4) Bhaskar Rao Jadhav (Maharashtra)
       
       5) Mahars under Ambedkar (Maharashtra)
       
       6) Kerala me, K.Aiyappan and C.kesavan ke under Radical Ezhavaas
       
       7) Bihar ke Yadavs
       
       8) Fazl-i-Hussain ke under Punjab ki Unionist Party
       
      
      
      
      
      
      
    Dekhte hi Dekhte, ye saale Socialists log 'Revolutionary Randaap' karne lage. 
    
       i) Punjab-UP-Bihar me Hindustan Republican Association 
       
      ii) Begal me Yugantar, Anushilan groups or baad me Chittagong Revolt Group(Under Surya Sen)
      
      
        Lekin sala, 1920 ke baad ye Revolutionary randaap kyu start ho gaya doabar ?
        
        
           1)   1st WW ke baad, revolutionaries ki kaafi kaske gaand mari gayi thi. 
           
           2) Lekin, 1920s me bohot saaro ko chor diya gaya tha jail se, Montford ke time. 
           
           3) Iske baad Gandhi ne NCM start kar diya. 
           
           4) Gandhi or CR Das ki persuassion se ye sab bhi NCM me lag gaye, non-violent methods ko ek chance dene ke liye. 
           
           5) NCM ke sudden withdrawl se, bohot saare disillusioned ho gaye.   Ye Swarajists ke parliamentary kaam se nafrat karte the, or No-Changers me se inhe badbu aati thi. 
           
           6) War ke baad jo Trade Unionism start hua, ye sab uski energy ko harness karna chahte the, for Nationalist revolution 
           
           7) Russian Revolution of 1917
           
           8) Marxism , Socialism 
           
           9) Journals jo revoltionary randaap failati thi : Atmasakti, Sarathi and Bijoli.. 
           
          10) Sachin Sanyal ka Bandi jiwan, Sharatchandra Chatterjee ka Pathar Dabi
          
          
          
          
          
          1) Punjab-UP-Bihar
          
              - Dominated by Hindustan Republican Association/Army or HRA---> Ye baad me Hindustan Socialist Republican Association ban gaya. 
              
              - Ise, 1924 me Kanpur me banaya gaya tha: i) Ramprasad Bismil  ii) Jogesh Chandra Chatterjee or iii) Sachin Sanyal ne milke. 
              
              - Inka aim tha : Armed revolution se colonial Government ko overthrow karna, or iski jagah Federal Republic of United States of India banana, jiska basic principle hoga Adult Franchise. 
              
              - Kakori Robbery, 1925
              
                      i) Lucknow ke pass, kakori naam ke ganv me ek Train looti. 
                      
                     ii) Iske baad, GoI ne inki gaand mar di--> 17 ko jail hui, 4 ko kaalapani, 4 ko latka diya gaya : i) Bismil  ii) Ashfaqullah  iii) Roshan Singh and iv) Rajendra Lahiri
                     
                     
              - HSRA
              
                  i) Delhi ke Ferozshah Kotla me 1928 me, Chandra Shekar Azad ke under, HRA ka naam change kar, HSRA kar diya gaya. 
                  
                 ii) Bhagat Singh, Sukhdev,  Bhagwati Charn Vohra(Bomb wale) --> Ye teeno Punjabi;    Bejoy Kumar Sinha, Shiv Verma and Jaidev Kapur (Ye teeno UP ke)
                 
                iii) Official Goal - Socialism 
                
                
                
              - 1928 me inhone Saunders ki maa chod di.  teeno Punjab waalo ne. Saunders ne Lala ke lath mare the, Anti-Simon Commission procession ke time. 
              
              
              - 1929 me, HSRA ne Bhagat Singh and Batukeshwar Dutt ko, Central Legislative Assembly me bomb fodne ko bola, to protest against the passage of Public Safety Bill and Trade Dispute Bill
              
              
              - Bhagat Singh, Sukhdev or Rajguru ko Lahore Conspiracy Case me saja hui.   Baaki HSRA walo par bhi case chale. 
              
                  Jatin das ne 64 din water fast kar, dum tod diya (RiP Bro)
                  
                  Inke defence me kai saare congress leaders aaye. 
                  
                  
               - Azad, Viceroy Irwin ki train udane wala tha, lekin Allahbad me ek Park me Encounter me shaheed ho gaye ( RiP bro)
               
               - Bhagat Singh, Sukhdev and Rajguru ko 23 March, 1931 ko latka diya gaya (RiP guys)
               
               
                            
                     
        Bengal
        
        
                C. R. Das ke kehne pe ye bohot saaro ne hathiyaar daal diye the. 
                
                Das ki 1925 me death ho gayi. -----> Is se congress 2 parts me divide ho gayi _---> i) J. M SenGupta was group (Anushilan wale iske saath ho liye)   ii) Subhash bose wala group (Yugantar wale iske saath)       
                
                
              - Charles Tegat naam ke badmash Calcutta ke Police Comsissioner ko Head shot diya, Gopinath Saha ne 1924 me. 
              
              - Govt. naye ordinances layi, and went medieval on their asses. 
              
              - Subhash bose etc ko jail ho gayi. 
              /
              - Gopinath Saha ko latka diya gaya.   
                
              - Is wajah se Revolutionary bhai log, ko setback laga. 
              
              - Lekin, thode hi time me, naye 'Revolt Groups' ban gaye. Ex : Chittagong group, jo Surya Sen ke under tha. 
              
              
              
                   Chittagong armoury raid( April, 1930)
                   
                     - Surya Sen bhai, Chittagong ke national school ke teacher the, or NCM me participate kiya tha. 
                     
                     - 1926 se 1928 tak jail bhi hui thi, revolutionary activities ke liiye.  LEkin jail se nikalke, firse Congress ke liye kaam karte rahe. 
                     
                     - Chittagong district congress committee ke head the.  "Humanism is a special virtue of a revolutionary". 
                     
                     - Tagore or Qazi Nazgul..sorry Nazrul Islam ki poetry pasand thi. 
                     
                     - Armed revolt organise kiya with his sathi log( Anant singh, Ganesh Ghosh, Lokenath Baul)----> Ye dikhane ke liye, ki British empire ko challenge kiya ja sakta hai. 
                     
                     - 2 armouris ko seize karne ka plan banaya + To destroy telephone and Telegraph lines + To dislocate railway link to Chittagong. 
                     
                     - 1930 ko raid hui, 65 activists ke saath---Under the banner ho Indian Republican Army- Chittagong Branch.   Sen ne national Flag bhi hoist kiya.  Or ek Provincial Revolutionary Governemt proclaim kar di. 
                     
                     - Feb, 1933 ko bhai ko arrest kar liya gaya, or 1934 ko latka diya gaya. 
                     
                     - Lekin, is raid ki wajah se sab revolutionary bhaio ko boner aa gaya. 
                     
                     
                     
                     
               Bengal ke revolutionaries me aisa kya special tha : 
               
               
                  1) Young lugai log participate karti thi : Surya Sen bhai Playboy type the, to unke under specially. 
                  
                        - Pritilata Wadedar---> raid karte karte shaheed (RiP Mam)
                        
                        - Kalpana Dutt--------> Jail hui or Surya Bhai ke saath hi case chala, Life sentence mili
                        
                        - Santi Ghosh and Suniti Chandheri------>  2 school girls, jinhone Comilla ke district magistrate ko goli mari. 
                        
                        - Bina Das-----> Fired point blank at Governor, convocation me apni degree lete time. (Feb 1932)
                        
                        
                        
                        
                        
                  2) Individual action ki jagah, state ke against Group action par jor tha.   Objective tha : Youth ko inspire karna or Babudum ko demoralise karna. 
                  
                  3) Hindu-Religiosity wali tendencies chor di thi-----> Muslims ka participation bhi tha---> Satar, Mir Ahmed, Fakir Ahmed ian and Tunu Mian jaise bros the, Surya bhai ke saath. 
                  
                 
                  
                  
            1933 me Chote Nehru ko jail ho gayi, sedition ke liye kyunki is ne Revolutionaries ke heroism ko appreciate kiya tha. 
            
                  
                  
                  
                  
       In sab Revolutionaries logo ki Ideology : 
       
       
          1) HRA ka jo main organ tha 'Revolutionary' or unke HRA Manifest(1925) me the ki wo, Sab tarah ke systems ke abolition chahte hain, jin se man se man ka exploitation possible hota hai. 
          
          2) HRA wale, Railways, Heavy industries ka nationalisation chahte the. 
          
          3) HRA, Peasant and labour movements tayyar karna chahti thi, taki, Organised and armed revolt ki taraf kaam kiya ja sake. 
          
          4) Lekin, end me ye log, Individual heroic actions se Mass politics ki taraf jaane lag gaye the. 
          
          5) Bismil ne bhi, bola tha ki Gun Wun chor, open movement me kaam karo. 
          
          6) Bismil ne Hindu-Mulla unity ko bhi strength karne ki baat kahi thi. 
          
          7) Bismil ne communism me faith affirm ki thi, or kaha tha ki 'Sab human beings ko equal rights hain, over the prodicts of nature'. 
          
          8) Bhagwaticharn Vohra ne 'The Philosophy of the Bomb' likhi. 
          
          9) Bhagat singh ne 1926 me Naujawan Bharat Sabha banane me madad ki thi---> youth, peasants or workers me political work karne ke liye. 
          
         10) Bhagat and Sukhdev ne LaWhore Student's union organise ki thi, Open, Legal work among students ke liye. 
         
         11) Bhagat was a full blown socialist---> Socialim = Abolition of Capitalism and Class domination. 
         
         12) Bhagat was also completely secular. 
         
         
         
         
         
      Simon Commission : 
      
      
           1) GoI act me hi ek provision thi, ki 10 saal baad, ek commission appoint kiya jayega, to study the progress of governance scheme and suggest new steps. 
           
           2) ALl-White 7 membered Indian Statutory commission setup ki gayi, in 1927 ---> Simon Commission.  (Is time Stanely Baldwin prime minister tha)
           
           3) Lekin, ise 2 saal pehle hi bana diya gaya, kyunki conservative govenment nahi chahti thi ki liberals decide kare ye sab. 
           
           4) Is se pehle, Lee Commission ki report ne bataya tha- ' Failure of Raj to recruit enough british officers'. 
            
                           Mudiman Commission ne bataya tha -----  ' Diarchy is fucked up'
                           
                           Linlithgow comission ne bataya tha----- ' Indian Agriculture me crisis hai' 
                           
                              
         
           5) Is time Secy of State the-  Lord Dickhead,...I mean Lord Birkenhead----> Ye bolta tha, ki Indian were unable to draft a consit on their own that will have the support of wide sections of Indian political opinion. 
           
           
           
               Indian Response : 
               
               
                  Indians sab goro ko dekh bhadak gaye. ----> Bunch of british fags were going to discuss India's fitness for self-government. 
                  
                     Ye principle of self-determination ka violation tha.  And it was a deliberate insult to the self-respect of Indians. 
                     
                     
                     
               Congress Response : 
               
               
                   Madras ke congress session (December 1927) undet the presidency of M.A.Ansari---> Commission ka boycott karenge bhailog, at every stage and in every form. 
                     
                      Chota nehry bhi kamyab ho gaya to get a snap resolution passed--> Declaring complete independence as the goal of Congress. 
                      
                      
                      
               Other groups ka response :
               
               
                   Boycott ka support kiya : Hindu Mahasabha ne + Snake Jinnah ke under, Mulla league ke majority faction ne.    Punjab ke unionists + South ki Justice party ne Support kiya. 
                   
                      Mulla league ke 2 session hue in 1927 :  1) Under Jinnah At calcutta---> Oppose simon    2) LaWhore under Mohammad Shafi---> Support Government    [Dichotomy of mulla Nation]
                      
                      
                   Bombay Legislative Council ne BRA ko appoint kiya, to go and work with Simon Commission. 
                   
                      Bhai Argued for : i) Universal Adult Franchise for both Mard and Nari alike. 
                         
                                       ii) Provinces me Provincial Autonomy
                                       
                                      iii) Centre me Dyrarchy
                                      
                       
                      Bahiskrit Hitkarni Sabha ke behalf pe BRA ne Submit kiya : Memorandum on the rights and safeguards, that were required for Depressed classes. 
                      
                      BRA ne bola ki- Depressed classes or Hindu Community ke beech koi link nahi hai. 
                      
                                    - Depressed classes ko distinct and independent minority ki tarah treat kiya jaye. 
                                     
                                    - Depresed classes ko baki sab minorites se jyada protection ki jarurat hia, apni educational backwardness or Gareeb conditions ki wajah se. 
                                    
                                    - Hame bhi, mulla community ke mafik, Political protection and Representation milna chahiye. 
                                    
                                    - Agar Universal Adult Franchise nahi diya gaya to 'He would campaign for seperate electorates for the depressed classes'. 
                                    
                                 
                                                                           
                      
                Public Ka response : 
                
                
                    Commission Bombay me land ki, 1928 me----> Desh bhar me hartal se swagat kiya gaya. 'Simon Go Back' was the nara. 
                    
                    
                    Ye protest wagarh se bohot saare Youth log, pehli baar politicise hue.   Youth league and conferences got a real fillip. 
                    
                    
                    Subhash Bose and Nehru emerged as leaders of this New wave of Youth and students.              
                      
                      
                    Isi chutiyaap me naye radical ideas jaise Socialism wagarh youth me fail gaye. -----> Punjab Naujawan Bharat Sabha, Workers and Peasansts pary and Hindustan Sewa Dal in Karnataka, ye sab ne kaafi kand kiye. 
                    
                    
                    
              Police Response : 
              
              
                   Police ne Sir fodne ki nayi technique develop ki. 
                   
                   Chote Nehru or G.B Pant ko lucknow me koda kiya gaya. 
                   
                   Lala ko October, 1928 me Luth mare gaye, jis se bhai ne dam tod diya. 
                   
                   
                   
                   
                   
                   
             Simon Commission ka National Movement par kya impact hua : 
             
                i) Na sirf, complete indepence ki baat ne jor padka, Lekin, Socialist lines par major Socio-Economic reforms ki baato ne bhi jor pakad liya. 
                
               ii) Congress jo tab, shaant padi thi, Ek baar fir mass movemnet karne ko tayyar ho gayi. 
               
              iii) Lord Dickhead ki baat sunkar, Indians ne khudka consti banane ka faisla kar liya. 
              
              
              
              
              
        Simon Commission ke recommendation :
        
        
           1) May 1930 me 2 volume report publish ki : 
           
                 1) Dyarchy wale chutiyaap ko abolish karo. 
                 
                 2) Provinces me Representative government establish karo, jise Autonomy mili ho.  
                 
                 3) Governor ke pass lekin, fir bhi discretionary powers honi chahiye,  Internal Security or Different Communities ko protect karne ke liye. 
                 
                 4) Provincial Legislative councils ke members ko increase karna chahiye. 
                 
                 5) Report ne Centre me Parliamentary responsibilty ko reject kar diya. 
                 
                 6) Governor General ke pass full power honi chahiye===> To appoint the members of the Cabinet. 
                 
                 7) GoI ka complete control hoga, High Court par. 
                 
                 8) Seperate electorates ache hain---> Extend karna chahiy or communities ke liye bhi, Lekin tab tak, jab tak Hindu-Mullo me tensions khatam na ho jaye. 
                 
                 9) Koi Universal Franchise nahi hogi. 
                 
                10) Federalism acha hai---> Lekin abhi nahi, baad me.   Ek consultative coucil of Greater India banayi jaye---> Jisme, British Provinces or Princly States included ho
                
                11) NWFP or Baluchistan ko local legislatures milne chahiye, or in dono ka centre me representation badhaya jana chahiye. 
                
                12) Indian army ko Indianise kiya jaye. Lekin, British forces present rehni chaiye, jabtak India got fully equipped. 
                
             
             
             
          Lekin, Jabtak ye report aayi, Iska relevance hi khatam ho chuka tha, kyunki tabtak bohot saare kaand ho chuke the. 
          
          
          
          
          
       Nehru Report: 
       
       
           Lord Dickhead ke challenge ko accept kar----> Feb, 1928 me ek All Parties Conference hui----> Ek Sub-committee appoint ki gayi, under the Chairmanship of Moti----> To draft a consti. 
           
           Committe me the : i) Tej Bahadur Saanp Ru   ii) Subhash bose   iii) M.S. Aney   iv) Mangal Singh   v) Ali Imam    vi) Shuab Qureshi    vii) G.R.Pradhan
           
           
           1928 me hi report finalise kar di gayi.   Puri Report ke recommendation unanimous the, except 1 : --> Majority ne Dominion Status favour kiya tha, lekin ek section tha jo "Complete independence" chahte tha. 
           
           
           
       Main Recommendations: 
       
       
          1) British India tak hi confined thi---> Lekin future me, Princely States ke saath link-up ho sakta hai, on a federal basis. 
          
          2) Dominion ke liye recommend kiya : 
          
                  a) Dominion Status on the lines of Self-Governing Dominions as the form of Governemnt desired by Indians. 
                  
                  b) Rejection of Seperate Electorates---> Joint, with seats reserved for Mullas at centre and provinces jinme wo minority me hain, in proportion to their population 
                  
                  c) Linguistic Provinces
                  
                  d) 19 Fundamental Rights--> Equal rights for women, Right to form unions, UAF
                  
                  e) Centre or Provinces, dono me responsible government. 
                  
                  f) Centre me Indian Parliament jisme honge, 500 member House of Representative (Elected on basis of UAF/ 5 year tenure) and 200-Member Senate (Elected by Provinces ke councils/ 7 year tenure) .   
           
                  g) Central Government to be headed by Governor General, jise British Government appoint karegi, lekin use Indian Revenues se pay kiya jayega.  
                     
                     Ye central Executive council ke advice pe kaam karega, jo Responsible hoga Parliament ke. 
                     
                  h) Provincial Councils ka 5-year tenure hoga.  Inhe Governor head karega, on the advice of Provincial Executive council 
                  
                  i) Mulle ke cultural and Religious interests ko full protection diya jayega
                  
                  j) Complete dissociation of State from Religion. 
                  
                  
                     
                     
      Mulla and Dindu Communal Response  
      
          1) Mulla League ke Delhi Proposals
          
              - 1927 me Mulla Leaders, Delhi me mile, Mulla league ke session me----> 4 propsal diye, to be incorporated into draft consti. 
              
              - In propsals ko Congress ne Madras session me accept kar liya
              
                    i) Joint electorates with Reserved seats
                    
                   ii) Central Legislative Assembly me 1/3rd representation
                   
                  iii) Punjab and Bengal me Mullo ko representation in proportion to their population 
                  
                   iv) 3 naye Mulla Majority provinces ka formation :----> Sindh    Balochistan     NWFP      
           
           
           
           
           2) Dindu Mahasabha ke Demanda
           
           
                   - Ye, naye mulla majority provinces banane ke bilkil opposed the. 
                   - Ye, mullo ko Punjab or Bengal jaise mulla majority states me reservation dene ke bhi bilkul against the. 
                   - Ye ek strict unitary structure chahte the. 
                   
                   
                   
                   Inke is attitude se matters complicate ho gaye. 
                   
                                      
                  
           
           3) Compromise : 
           
                Moti Dilema me pad gaya :-     Mullo ki communal demand mani to Dindu apna support hata denge and vice-versa
                
                 Concession : i) Joint electorates, lekin Mullo ke liye seats reserved only where they are in minority. 
                 
                             ii) Sindh ko Bombay se detach kar denge, lekin only after dominion status has been granted---> Or wo bhi tab, jab Sindh ki Hindu minority approve kare. 
                             
                           
                           
           4) Snake Jinnah ke proposed amendments : 
           
             
                    1928, me Calcutta ki All Parties conference to Consider Nehru Report me Snake Jinnah ne Mulla League ke behalf par 3 amendments propose ki :
                    
                          i) Central Legislature me mullo ka 1/3rd representation
                          
                         ii) Bengal or Punjab legislature me mullo ko, unki populaiton ke proportion me reservation, jab tak Universal Sufferage establish na ho jaye. 
                         
                        iii) Residual powers, Provinces ke pass ho.
                        
                        
                    Lekin, Ye demans, accomodate nahi ki gayin. 
                    
                    
                    
          5)  Snake Jinnah ke 14 points. 
          
          
               Snake Jinnah, naraj hokar, dobara Mulla league ke Shafi Faction ke under chala gaya, or March 1929 me 14 points lekar aaya : 
               
                  1) Federal consti, jisme residual powers provinces ke pass hongi.
                  
                  2) Provincial autonomy
                  
                  3) Indian Federation me States, ki concurrence ke bina, Centre koi consti amendments nahi kar sakta
                  
                  4) Sab legislatures or elected bodies me me Mullo ke liye, adequate representation
                  
                  5) Services or Self-Governing bodies me bhi mullo ko representation
                  
                  6) Central Legislature me mullo ko 1/3rd Representation
                  
                  7) Centre or Provinces ki Cabinets me 1/3rd Mulle. 
                  
                  8) Seperate Electorates
                  
                  9) Koi bhi bill/Resolution tab tak pass nahi hoga, jabtak, Minority community ke 3/4th log, us bill ko apne interests ke against samjhe. 
                  
                 10) Koi bhi territorial redistribution se Punjab, Bengal or NWFP me Mulla Majority samapt nahi ki jayegi. 
                 
                 11) Bombay se Sindh ko seperate kiya jayega
                 
                 12) NWFP or Baluchistan me Consti reforms. 
                 
                 13) Sab communities ko full religious freedom 
                 
                 14) Religion, Culture, education or language rights of Mullas ko protection
                 
                 
                 
                 
                 
         Matlab, Saala Nehru Report se sab gusse me the : Mulle, Dindu, Sikh or even Younger Nationalists bhi
         
                 Nehru or Bose to itna gussa ho gaye ki, Independence for India League setup kar li. 
                 
                 
                         
                 
                 
                 
                 
      Civil Disobedience Movement and Round Table Conferences
      
      
         Congress ke Calcutta Session : 1928---> Nehru Report ko approve kiya gaya.    Lekin Bose, Nehru or Satyamurthy Purna Swaraj ki baate kar rahe the. 
         
         
             - Moti or Gandhi, lekin Dominion se hi khush the. 
             - Ye chahte the ki 2 saal ka grace period diya jana chahiye GoI ko, Dominion status ki demand accept karne ke liye. 
             - Lekin, jab Bose/Chote Nehru ne nas kaatne ki dhamki di, to ye period ek saal kar diya gaya. 
             
           Congress ne decide kiya ki, Ki saala ek saal ke andar andar, agar dominion status nahi diya gaya, to Civil Disobedience movement launch kar diya jayega. 
           
           
           
                        
                 
         1929 me Gandhi, pura desh ghuma, or logo ko Direct political action ke liye, tayyar kiya. 
         
         CWC ne Foreign Cloth Boycott committee banai. 
         
         Gandhi, kapde jalane ka plan, 1929 me calcutta se initiate karne wala tha, lekin aisa karne se pehle hi jail ho gayi. 
         
         
         
         
         Isi saal, Meerut Consipiracy case chala ,    Central Legislative assembly me Bhagat and BK Dutt ne bomb feka,    England me Labour GOvernment aa gayi, under Ramsay MacDonal, or Wedgewoon Benn Secy of State bana
         
         
         
         
     Irwin ki 31st October, 1929 ki decleration: 
     
        Simon Commission ki report aane se pehle, Irwin ne ye declare kiya ki, " Saala 1917 me hi hamne bola diya thia, ki Dominion status dena hamara goal hai". 
        
        Par BC, fir saalo ne koi Time Frame nahi diya. 
        
        Irwin, ne ek Round Table Conference karne ko bhi bola, after the simon commission report has been submitted. 
        
        
        
        
        
     Iske baad, 2nd November, 1929 me Prominent national Leaders ne "Delhi Manifesto" issue kiya :  Certain conditions for attending the Round Table Conference
     
     
        1) RTC ka purpose hona chahiye: Formulate a consti for implementation of the dominion status (Matlab RTC ek Consti assembly ki tarah act kare) 
        
        2) Congress ko RTC me mojority representation di jani chahiye
        
        3) Political Prisoners ke liye General Amnesty issue karo, jaise Taliban ne ki hai. 
        
        
        
        
            Gandhi, baaki Khangresio ke saath, December 1929 me Irwin se mila, uska haal chaal puchne (Irwin ki train par thode time pehle hi bomb feka gaya tha)
            
            
               Irwin ne bola, " Dekh ganje, RTC ka purpose koi Dominion status ke liye consti scheme tayyar karna nahi hai, or ye Delhi Manisfesto ko apni gaand me daal le "
               
               
               Ye sunke, baapu ne Irwin ke mu par peshab kar diya, or waha se bhaag gaya.    
               
               
               
               
               
     December, 1929 me LaWhore me INC ka Dhamaakedar Session Hua : Chote Nehru ko bada kaam karne ke liye, President banaya gaya (kyuni Baapu ka aashirwaad hasil tha)
     
     
        1) RTC ko Boycott kiya jayega
        
        2) COngress ka aim hoga, complete independence
        
        3) CWC ko authorise kar diya gaya Civil disobedience programme launch karne ko ----> Including Non-Payment of Taxes  +  Legislature ke sab members were asked to resign          
               
        4) January 26, 1930--> 1st Independence Day==> To be celebrated everywhere. 
        
        
        
        
    December 31, 1929 : Ravi Nadi ke kinare, Newly adopted Tricolour flag of freedom ko hoist kiya gaya by Chota Nehru. 
    
    
    
    Januray 26, 1930 : Independece Pledge
     
         Pure desh me public meetings organise ki gayi, or Independence pledge padhi gayi, local languages me or National Flag ko hoist kiya gaya. 
         
         
    
    Gandhi ne fir, GoI ke aage 11 demands rakhi, or 31st January, 1930 ka ultimatum diya to accept or reject these demands : 
    
    
      General Interst me : 1)  Army or Civil services ka expenditure 50% tak kam karo
      
                           2)  Nasha Mukti
                           
                           3) CID me reforms karo
                           
                           4)  Arms act ko change karo, mujhe pistol chahiye
                           
                           5)  Political prisoners ko release karo
                           
                           6)  Postal Reservation bill ko accept karo
                           
     Specific Brijwasi demands : 7) Rupee Sterling Exchange ration 1s 4d karo
     
                                 8) Textile Protection introduce karo
                                 
                                 9) Coastal Shipping Indians ke liye reserve karo
                                 
          Specific Peasant Demands :  10) Land Revenue 50% tak kam karo
          
                                      11) Salt Tax abolish karo, or Governmen's salt monopoly bhi
                                      
                                      
                                      
                                      
                    Ye demands meet na hone par, CWC ne Gandhi ko full powers de di, to launch the CDM, jab man kare, jaha man kare.                   
                                      
                                      
                                      
                                      
                                      
            12 March 1930 ko Gandhi ne Dandi March start kiya, or 6th April ko salt law break kiya .                           
                                      
                                      
                      Gandhi ne jo baaki instructions diye the, unke basis pe , akele Gujrat ke hi 300 village officials ne resign kar diya.                 
                                       
                                      
                Bas fir Indians NPCs ki tarah Namak Namak karte hue, Pure desh me Salt law break karne lage. 
                
                
                  - Nehru ko April 1930 me Namak bechte hue police ne range haatho pakad liya. Iske baad, Madras, Calcutta or Karachi me huge demonstrations hue. 
                  
                  - Gandhi ko 4th May ko arrest kiya gaya----> Jab bapu ne bola ki wo, Dharsana salt works par chadhai karne wala hai. 
                  
                  
                      Gandhi ke arrest ke baad CWC ne sanction kiya : 
                      
                          a) Ryotwari areas me non-payment of revenue
                          
                          b) Zamindari areas me koi chowkidara-tax na de
                          
                          c) CP me forest laws ko violate kiya jaye. 
                          
                          
                          
                          
                 Tamil Nadu : 
                 
                            1) April, 1930 :   C. Rajagopalachari ne Thiruchirapalli se Vedaranniyam tak (On Tanjore coast) me march organise kiya or Salt law toda.                                
                                      
                                               Iske baad, Foreign cloth shops ki picketing hui,   Anti-Daru campaign fail gaya Coimbatore, Madura, Virdhangar jaise inerior regions me bhi. 
                                               
                                               Gudiyattam me berojgaar weavers ne daaru ke theeko par attack kiya
                                               
                                               
                                      
                                                            
                  Malabar :   
                   
                                     K.Ke;appan (Vaikom Satyagraha se famous hua nair khangressi) ne Salt march organise kiya.     
                                      
                                     Kerala Communist party ka future leader- P. Krishna Pillai, ne Calicut beach par National Flag ko police lathi charge ke beech defend kiya, in November 1930. 
                                     
                                     
                                     
                                     
                  Andhra Region : 
                  
                   
                                         East/West Godavar, Krishna or Guntur regions me District salt marches organise kiye gaye. 
                                         
                                         Salt Satyagraha ke HQs ke liye, bohot saare military style camps setup kiye gaye, jinhe Sibirams kehte the. 
                                         
                                         Kamma or Raju cultivators, jo dominant castes thi---> Inhone Repressive measures ko defy kiya. 
                                         
                                         Lekin, yaha 1921-22 ke NCM jaisa Mass support mission tha                   
                                     
                                     
                                     
                   Orissa : 
                   
                                   Gopalbandhu Chaudhuri ke under Salt Satyagraha organise kiya gaya, Balasore, Cuttack or Puri Districts ke coastal regions me. 
                                   
                                   
                                   
                                   
                                   
                   Assam :   
                    
                                     Yaha alag hi chutiyaap chal raha tha, Hindu-Mullo or, Ahomiya-Bongs ke beech, isliye feeka hi tha CDM. 
                                     
                                     Lekin, Cunningham Circular ke against, ek successful student strike organise ki gayi. 
                                     
                                     Chandraprabha Saikiani, ne December 1930 me Aboriginal Kachari Villages ko bhadkaake, Forest laws break karwaye. 
                                     
                                     
                                     
                                     
                  Bengal :  
                  
                                       Yaha Bengal Congress 2 factions me divide ho gayi thi : Bose and J.M. Sengupta.                   
                                     
                                       Dacca me communal riots ho gaye.   To mullo ne participate nahi kiya. 
                                       
                                       Is sab ke bavajood bhi, Bong sabse jyada arrest hue + Sabse jyada violence ki. 
                                       
                                       Chaukidari tax ke around powerful movements organise hue. 
                                       
                                       Isi time, Surya Sen ne bhavuk hokar, Chittagong armoury raid ki. 
                                       
                                       
                                       
                                       
                   Bihar :     
                   
                                      Champaran or Saran, pehle 2 districts the, jaha Salt Satyagraha start hue. 
                                      
                                      Patna ke Nakhas pond me Salt law break kiya gaya, under Ambika kant sinha. 
                                      
                                      
                                      Lekin jaldi hi, ek kaafi powerful no-chaukidari tax agitation start ho gaya, jisne salt wale chutiyaap ko replace kar diya. 
                                      
                                      
                                      Munger ke kuch regions me to sala administration hi collapse ho gaya. 
                                      
                                      
                                      
                                      
                                      Jharkhand ke Chhotanagapur ke tribal belt me to lower-class militancy dekhne ko mili. 
                                      
                                      Bonga Majhi or Somra Majhi naam ke 2 gandhian leaders, ne Hazaribagh me movement lead kiya--> Isme socio-religious reforms combine kiye gaye along 'sanskritising' lines. 
                                      
                                      Chote zamindar bhi movemnet me participate kiye. 
                                      
                                      
                                      
                 Peshawar :  
                 
                                   Khan Abdul Gaffar Khan ne Pathans me educational and social reforms kiye the, or unhe politicise kar diya tha. 
                                   
                                   KAGK ko Badhshah khan a.k.a Frontier gandhi kehte the. 
                                   
                                   Is bhai ne pehla Pashto political monthly start kiya tha- 'Pukhtoon' or Khudai khidmatgar naam ki volunteer brigade bhi start ki thi.(red shirts) 
                                   
                                   23 April, 1930 ko congress leaders ke arrest hone se, Peshawar me mass demonstrations hue. 
                                   
                                   Iske baad waha martial law laga diya gaya. 
                                   
                                   Yahi par, Garhwal rifles ke ek section ne Unarmed crowd par fire karne se mana kar diya. 
                                   
                                   
                                   
                                   
               Sholapur : 
               
                                         South Maharshtra ke is industrial town me, Gandhi ke arrest hone se Log aag babula ho gaye. 
                                         
                                         7th May ko Textile workers strike pe chale gaye, or Daaru ke thekko ke aag laga di. 
                                         
                                         Fir inhone, police stations, Munci buildings, Courts etc ke aag laga di. 
                                         
                                         Ye kuch time ke liye, ek parallel government hi start ho gayi thi, jab tak Martial law na laga diya gaya. 
                                         
                                         
                                         
                                         
              Dharsana : 
              
                                    Gandhi ke bete Manilal, Sarojini Naidu or Imam Sahib ne Raid ki salt works pe. 
                                    
                                    320 logo ke sir fode gaye. 
                                    
                                    
                                    
                                    
                                    
               
             Gujrat : 
             
                               Kheda District ke Anand, Borsad or Nadiad areas me ,  Surat ke Bardoli me, or Bharuch ke Jambusar me impact dekha gaya 
                               
                               
                               No-tax movement organise hua, logo ne land revenue dene se hi mana kar diya. 
                               
                               Log, police ke dando se bachne ke liye, baaju wale princly state of Baroda me bhaag gaye. 
                               
                               Police ne unki properties ke aag laga di, or land confiscate kar li. 
                               
                               
                               
            Maharashtra, Karnataka and CP : 
                                                          Forest laws break kiye gaye, Timer restrictions or grazing restrictions bhi,,   Illegaly acquired forest produce ki khule me sale ki gayi. 
                                                          
                                                          
                                                          
                                                          
                             Uinited Province :    
                             
                             
                                                    No-Revenue Campaign organise kiya gaya.   Zamindars ko bola gaya ki saal khabardaar hai, jo governemnt ko revenue pay kiya to
                                                    
                                                    No-rent campaign organise kiya gay, jisme tenants ne zamindars ko kiraya dene se mana kar diya. 
                                                    
                                                    Agra or Rai-bareilly me specially intense thi
                                                    
                                                    
                                                    
                                                    
                      Manipur and Nagaland : 
                      
                      
                                             13 saal ki Naga leader, Rani Gaidinliu ne foreign rule ke against revolt ka banner utha liya. 
                                             
                                             Logo ko kaha ki brits ko tax mat dena. 
                                             
                                             iske bhai ko agle saal brits ne latka diya or bahan ko jail me daal diya. 1946 me Interim gov ne jail se bachaya. 
                                             
                                             
                                             
                                             
                                             
                                             
                July 1930 me Lord Irwin ne Dominon status ka lalch diya, or RTC karne ki baat ki. 
                
                    Isi time, Tej Bahadur Sampru or M.R.Jayakar, aage aake bole, ki hum peace karwate hain na Sir, COngress or aapke beech. Tension mat lo. 
                    
                    
                    
                    
                August 1930 me Moti or Chote Nehru ko Yeravad Jail bheja gaya, Gandhi se milne.     
                    
                                                 
                                             
                   January 25, 1931 ko Gandhi or CWC ke baaki sab members ko jail se chor diya gaya.                                                                                                         
                                                           
                   Feb 14, 1931 ko Gandhi-Irwin ek baar fir mile.  Gandhi ne promise kiya tha, ki wo Irwin par dobara peshaab nahi karega. 
                   
                   Or in dono ke beech, Gandhi-Irwin Pact sign hua : 
                   
                   
                          1) Political Prisoners ka release, jinhone violence na ki ho
                          
                          2) Remission of all fines
                          
                          3) Return of all lands 
                          
                          4) jin gov servants ne resign kar diya tha, unka lenient treatment
                          
                          5) Personal Consumption ke liye, namak banane ki ajaadi
                          
                          6) Peaceful picketing karne ki ajaadi
                          
                          7) Emergency ordinances ko withdraw kar diya gaya. 
                          
                          
                    Gandhi ne agree kiya to : 
                    
                             1) Suspend CDM 
                             
                             2) Participate in next RTC  
                             
                 Meeting khatam hone par, Irwin jaise hi Gandhi se haath milane gaya, Gandhi ne apni dhoti uthayi or Irwin ke mu pe dobara peshab kar diya, or Jaldi se waha se bhaag gaya. 
                 
                 
                 
                 
        CDM vs NCM
        
        
            1) Objective : Complete independence vs 2 specific wrongs and a vaguely worded swaraj
            
            2) Shuru se hi violation of laws and not just non-cooperation with foreign rule. 
            
            3) Intelligentisia jaise Lawyers giving up practices,  Students giving up Government schools, colleges etc    me decline aaya. 
            
            4) Mulle to aaye hi nahi
            
            5) Koi major labour upsurge bhi nahi hua
            
            6) Lekin is baar 3 guna jyada logo ko jail hui
            
            7) Congress jyada tagdi thi, organisationally
            
            
            
            
            
       March 1931 me, Karachi me Congress ka special session organise hua to endore Gandhi-Irwin. 
       
       
          Iske bas 6 din pehle hi, Bhagat singh, Sukhdev or Rajguru ko latkaya gaya tha. 
          
          Karachi me Punjab Naujawan Bharat Sabha ne Gandhi ko kaali jandhe dikhaye, or maa bahan ki gali di. 
          
          
          Congress ka karachi resolution : 
          
                 1) Teeno martyrs ki bravery or sacrifice ko admire kiya gaya
                 
                 2) Gandhi-Irwin pact / Delhi Pact ko endorse kiya gaya
                 
                 3) Purna Swaraj ke goal ko reiterate kiya gaya. 
                 
                 4) 2 resolution adopt kiye gaye :- Pehla Fundamental Rights par,                                            Dusra National Economic programme par. 
                                                          - Speech or free press                                                   - Rent or revenues me reduction
                                                          - Association banane ka right                                            - Agri karje ke relief
                                                          - Assemble hone ka right                                                 - Usury par control
                                                          - UAF                       						   - Industrial workers ki dekhbhaal
                                                          - Caste, creed or sex         		  	                   - Unions banane ke rights
                                                          - Secular state                                                          - Key industries, jaise mines, transport par state ka control
                                                          - Dree and compulsory primary education
                                                          - Culture, language, script of minorities ka protection
                                                          - Linguistic groups ka bhi
                 
                     
             Ye pehla time tha, jab congress ne bataya ki sala Swaraj dikhega kaisa. 
             
             Ye Karachi Resolutionm hi aage tak congress ka Political and economic programme rehne wala tha. 
             
             
             
             
             
             
       1st RTC
       
           - November 1930 se January 1931 tak
           - Chairman- Ramsay MacDonald
           - Ye pehli conference thi, jisme Brits or Indians equal mile the
           - Congress + Bizness leaders milne nahi gaye. 
           
           
           Princly States wale chode gaye the. 
           
           Mulla league ne bheja : Aga Khan III,  Shafi, Jauhar,  Snake Jinnah,  Zafarullah Khan, Hidayat ullah,   
           
           Dindu Mahasabha : B.S. Moonjee,  M.R. Jayakar and Diwan Bahadur Raja Narendra Nath
           
           Sikhs : Sardar Ujjal Singh and Sardar Sampuran Singh
           
           Parsis: Phiroze Sethna, Cowardji Jehangir   and   Homey Modi
           
           Women :  Begum Jahanara Shahnawaz   and   Randibai Subbaran
           
           Liberals :  J.N. Basu,   Tej Bahadue Saanpru  ,  C.Y. Chintamani,   V.S.Srinivas Shastri     and CHimanlal ki gandlal Setalvad
           
           Bhangio :  BRA and Rettamalai Srinivasan
           
           Justice Party: Arcot Ramasamy Mudaliar,  Bhaskarrao Vithojirao Jadhav and Sir A.P. Patro
           
           Labour:  N.M.Joshi and B. Shiva Rao
           
           Indian Christians: K.T.Paul
           
           Anglo Indians:  Henry Gidney
           
           GoI : Narendra Nath Law,  Bhupendra nath Mitra, C.P. Ramaswami Iyer and M.Ramachandra Rao
           
           
           Loda kuch achieve nahi hua
           
       2nd RTC
       
          INC ne bheja : Gandhi as sole representative.  A. Rangaswamy Iyenger and MMM bhi chale gaye, london ghumne. 
          
          Is se bhi loda kuch achieve nahi hua.
          
             - Irwin ko replace kar diya gaya tha just pehle, with Lord Willingdon as Viceory
             - Labour Govt replace ho gayi thi, Labour or Conservative ek ghatiya se coalition se called national governement. 
             - British log waise bhi gusse me the
             - Churchill choda, fannaya hua tha. 
             - Neech, mullo, Christians ne minority pact kar liya
             - Princes bhi federation wagarh me koi interest nahi rakhte the. 
             
             
               End me announce hua : 
               
                  1) 2 mulla majority provinces ka formation - NWFP and Sindh
                  
                  2) Indian Consultative commiittee ka setup
                  
                  3) 3 expert committee ka setup- Finance, Franchise and states
                  
                  4) Agar Indians agree nahi kar paye, to Unilateral British Communal Award. 
                  
            Gandhi ko Gussa aa gaya, or usne Table par chadhke, APni dhoti uthai or Sabke saamne Peshab kar diya, or 28th December, 1931 ko Police se bachta bachata wapas India aa gaya. 
            
            
            
            
      3rd RTC 
      
        
         November 1932 se December 1932 tak.     Isme Koi INC wala nahi gaya. 
               
            
            
               Iski recommendation par, ek white paper issue kiya gaya. 
               
               Ek joint committe banayi, Brit Parliament ne, ye recommendations analyse karne ke liye, or India ke liye, ek naya act formulate karne ke liye. 
               
               Is committee ne Feb 1935 me ek draft bill formulate kiya, which was endorsed as GoI act of 1935. 
            
            
            
            
            
            
            
      2nd RTC ke fail hote hi, CWC ne 29th December, 1931 ko CDM resume kar diya.       
            
                  
                  
              4th January, 1932 ko Gandhi ko arrest kar liya gaya.     
                  
                  
              Government ne ek civil martial law laga diya.   
              
              Congress organisations at all levels were banned. 
              
              Activists, leaders, sympathisers wagarh ko jail me patak diya. 
              
              Press gag kiya, Nationalist literature bann kad diya gaya. 
              
                  
         Finally, Gandhi ne April 1934 me CDM withdraw kar liya. 
         
         
         
         
     Communal Award and Poona Pact
     
     
        - Ramsay McDonald ne August 16, 1932 ko Communal Award announce kiya. 
        
        - Ise Lothian Committee (Indian Franchise Committee) ki recommendation par finalise kiya gaya tha. 
        
        - Is se, Minorities, including mulla and Bhangi jaati ke liye, Seperate electorates establish kiye gaye. 
        
        - Matlab, Ab---> Mulla, Europeans, Sikhs, Christians, Anglo-Indians, Depressed Classes or Bombay me Marathas ke liye bhi seperate electorates diye gaye. 
        
        
        
        
        Depressed class ke liye ye provisions 20 saalo ke liye the. 
        
        NWFP ke alawa, Sab provinces me 3% seats, women ke liiye reserved thi. 
        
        
        
        
        
        Congress even though to opposed thi, seperate electorates ke, lekin fir bhi, Congress decided neither to Accept it nor to reject it. 
        
        
        Gandhi ko lagta tha, ki seperate electorates se Achoot puri life ke liye, Achoot ban ke rah jayenge. 
        
           Is liye, Gandhi, Sept 20 me Indefinit fast par chala gaya.           
             
             
              Gandhi ko manane ke liye- BRA, M.C.Rajah,  MMM aaye----> Poona Pact
              
                                                                         - Joint electorates with reserved seats---> Provincial Legislature me seat 71 se badhkar 147 kar di gayi, or Central wale me 18 %. 
                                                                         
                                                                         
             
             
             
             Lekin, ALl India Scheduled Caste Federation ki Working committee ne bola : Is poona bakchodi or Joint Electorates ki wajah se---> Neech log apni pasand ke legislature nahi chun paate.    Hindu majority, apni pasand ka neech banda elect karke, legislature me bhej deti hai. 
             
             BRA bhadwa, Poona Pact sign karke ke baad bhi, 1947 tak ise denounce karta raha. 
             
             
             
             
       Gandhi ki Harijan Campaign
       
         - Gandhi me Jail ke andar se hi, GoI ke devisive agenda ko counter karne ke liye, Untouchability ke against campaign start kar di. 
         
         - September, 1932 me jail ke andar se hi---> ALl India Anti-Untouchability league setup kar di. 
         
         - 1933 me, 'Harijan' naam ka weekly start kiya. 
         
         - Jail se nikalkar, Satyagraha Ashram ko Wardha shift kar diya, kyunki 1930 me pran liya tha, ki Swaraj milne tak Sabarmati Ashram wapas nahi aayega. 
         
         - Wardha se fir bhai ne, Harijan tour start kiya, pure desh ka, Between 1933 to July 1934-----> Paise ikatthe kiye, Harijan Sevak Sangh ke liye. 
         
         - Dindu bhadwe, Gandhi ke khilaf khade ho gaye : Saale GoI ko support karne lage. 
         
                   GoI ne bhi Dindu bhadwo ko khush karne ke liye : Temple Entry Bill of 1934 ko defeat kar diya. 
         
         
         
         
         
         
     C.D.M gaddhe me jaane ke baad, debate chid gayi, ki BC ab kya karein
     
     
        3 ideas the :-  1) Gandhi ki tarah constructive work karne ka dhong karo
        
                        2) Elections me participate kar, Constitutional Struggle karo===> M.A.Ansaro,  Asaf Ali,  Bhulabhai Desai, S.Satyamuthry and B.C. Roy    
         
         
                        3) Congress ke andar ek strong leftist trend ubhar ke aa raha tha---> Led by Chota Nehru====> Non-Consti mass struggle ko resume karo. 
                        
                        
           Ye chahte the, ki Struggle-Truce-Struggle wale chutiyaap ki jagah Continous direct action hona chahiye(Specially after Lahore Purna Swaraj) and he suggested, A Struggle-Victory (S-V) Strategy. 
           
           
           
           
      Congress me split na ho jaye, isliye, Gandhi ne allow kar diya, Council entry ko. 
      
      1934 me All India COngress COmmittee(AICC) Patna me mili---> Parliamentary Board setup kiya---> To fight elections under the aegis of the congress itself. 
      
      
      October 1934 me Gandhi ne congress se resignation de diya. 
      
           
      November 1934 me Central Legislative Assembly ke jo elections hue, unme Congress ne 75 me se 45 seats jeet li.    
           
           
           
           Government of India act, 1935
           
           
           
              1) All India Federation 
              
              
              2) Centre me Dyarchy-> Reserved or Transferred subject
              
              3) Central Legislature:   Upper house (Council of States- 260 members), and Lower house ( Federal Assembly- 375 members) 
              
                                     CoS--> Partly elected from British Indian provinces and 40% nominated by the princes. 
                                     
                                     FA---> Partly indirectly elected from British Indian Provinces and 33% nominated by the princes. 
                                     
                                        (BC, kya chutiyaap hai---> Council of States ke election direct hain, or Fereal Assembly ke indirect)
                                        
                                        
              4) CoS--> Permanent body, 1/3rd members retiring every 3rd year.     FA---> 5 year duration
              
              5) Federal, Provincial and Concurrent lists. 
              
              6) FA ke members, Ministers ke against no-confidence motion pass kar sakte the. 
              
              7) Reliion or Caste based electorated ke system ko or bhi extend kar diya gaya. 
              
              8) 80% of budget, votable tha. 
              
              9) Governor-General ke pass residuary powers thi. 
              
             10) GG ke pass veto or ordinance powers bhi thi,or , ye saala chahta toGrants me cuts ko restore kar sakta tha,or Legislature ne agar bills ko reject kiya ho, to bhi unhe cerify kar sakta tha.                           
           
             11) Provinces se Dyarchy wala randaap khatam ho gaya, or Provincial Autonomy de di gayi. 
             
             12) Provinces ki legal assistance Secy of State or GG se hatakar, seedhe British Crown ke haatho me de di gayi. 
             
             13) Governor, direct crown ka representative tha. 
             
             14) Legislature ke saare members, directly elected the.    Aurato ko voting ka adheekar de diya gaya. 
             
             15) Responsible Ministers. 
             
             16) 40 % of budget, abhi bhi non-votable tha. 
             
             17) Governor chahta to Bill ko assent dene se mana kar sakta tha, Ordinace promulgate kar sakta tha,     Governor's act enact kar sakta tha. 
             
             18) Act, se laghbhag 14% Indians ko franchise mila. 
             
           
         
         
         
         Dindu Mahasabha or National Liberal Foundation ke alawa laghbhag sab Naionalists ne iska khandan kiya.       
             
            Congress boli, " Sala, Ab tum Consti assembly banao, to frame a constitution for Independent India ". 
            
            
            
             
             
              
     1937 me Provincial assemblies ke election announce kiye gaye, or ek baar fir debate start ho gayi. 
     
     
      - Nehru, Bose or baaki socialists, bilkul opposed the, office acceptance ke. 
      
      - Inhone, purane swarajists ki tarah, councils me ghuske, unki andar se maa chodne ke tareeke ko sahi bataya. 
      
                 
             
             
             Inke opposite, Office acceptance wale kehte the, ki Abhi mass movement ka time nahi hai, isliye chupchaap office accept karo as a short term tactic. 
             
             
             
             
          
          
          
          Gandhi bhi shuru me office acceptance ke against the, lekin 1936 tak, Bhai ne bhi congress minitries ke formation ko try karne ke liye thoda bohot raaji ho gya. 
          
          
          
       1936 ke Lucknow Sessio or 1937 ke Faizpur session me Congress ne decide kiya ki, Election fight karnenge, or Office Accept karne hai ya nahi karne, ye post election phase me decide karenge. 
       
       
       
       
       
       February, 1937 me provincial assemblies ke election hue---  11 provincs me. 
       
             Ye pehle election the, jisme kaafi saare Indians eligible the participate karne ko.  Laghbgah 15 million logo ne vote daale. 
             
             
             Congress ne jin 1161 seats par contest kiya tha, unme se wo 716 me jeet gate. 
             
             Sab provinces me majority mili except:- Bengal, Assam, Punjab and Sindh and NWFP. 
             
               Bengal, Assam and NWFP me bhi largest party yahi hi thi. 
               
               Is performance se Congress ki prestige badhi, or Chote Nehru ko man na pada ki S-T-S strategy hi theek hai. 
               
               
               
         Congress ne ministries form ki in Bombay, Madras, CP, Orissa , UP, Bihar or baad me NWFP or Assam me bhi. 
         
         
         
         
      Congress rule in Provinces : 
      
      
         28 mahine, Provinces me Congress rule raha. 
         
            
            1) Emergency powers dene wale laws, repeal kiye
            
            2) Hinustan Seval Dal and Youth leagues, jaise orgs se ban utha, Books or journalists wagarah se bhi. 
            
            3) Press restrictions hatai
            
            4) Black lists se Newspapers ko nikala
            
            5) Arms licences restore kiye
            
            6) Police or CID ko theekane lagaya
            
            7) Political prisoners or Revolutionaries ko release kiya
            
            8) CDM ke time bombay me jo land confiscate ki thi, wo lota di. 
            
            9) Lekin, Socialists or Communists par dande maare. Ye to achaa kiya. 
            
            
            
        Agrarian Reforms : 
        
             1) Land reforms, Debt relief, Forest frazing fee, Arrears of rent, Land tenures etc se related kai legislature laaye.     
            
            
            
       Labour : 
       
        
              Indistrialists or Labour ke beech rishte ache karne ki koshis ki gayi, taaki strikes kam ho, or Industrialisation badhe. 
              
              Lekin, Section 144 ka use karke, bohot saare leaders ko arrest kiya gaya. 
              
              
                   
        Social Welfare Reforms: 
        
        
              1) Bohot saare areas me Daaru band
              
              2) harijans ke liye:- Temple entry. Use of Public facilities, Scholorships, Government services me unka number badhaye, etc
              
              3) Primary, Technical or Higher education par jor diya gaya. 
              
              4) Public Health or Sanitation par kaam kiya gaya. 
              
              5) Khadi wagarh
              
              6) Prison reforms
              
              7) Subhash Bose ke under, National Planning Committee setup ki gayi, in 1938. 
              
              
                  
            
            
            
     In 1938 Gujrat ke Haripura, me Congress ki meeting hui, jisme Bose ko President elect kiya gaya.       
            
            - Session me decide hua ki, Pricly states me jo log governance ke against agitation kar rahe hain, Congress unhe moral support degi. 
            
           
            
            
     In 1939, Bose firse, Congress ke president ki post ke liye khade hue.      Lekin, Gandhi ko Bose nahi pasand the. 
     
       Gandhi ke baaki chele--> Sardar Patel, Rajendra Prasad, J.B.Kriplani etc  Gandhi ke canditate Pattabhi Sitaramayya ko support karte the. 
       
       Lekin, End me jeet to Bose ki hi honi thi.    Bose ko Congress socialist party or Commie chodo ka bhi support hasil tha. 
       
       Gandhi ki gand me aag lag gayi. 
       
       
       
     March 1939 me, Tripuri me congress session hua, in CP. 
     
     
       Bose ke election se Congress ke andar hi ghamaasaan macha hua tha. 
       
       
       Bose ne kai saae Working committee ke leaders par keechad uchal diya tha,ki ye saale to GoI ke saath Federation banane ko utawle ho rakhe hain. Is wajah se ye saale bhi jale hue the. 
       
       
       Bose ne kaha, ki saala British GoI ko 6 mahine ka ultimatum dena chahiye---> Ki national Demand for Independence maan lo, nahi to fir se CDM start kar denge, Bokachoda. 
       
       
       Bose ko lagta tha, ki Europe me mache randaap ka fayda uthana chahiye. 
       
       Lekin, Fattu Gandhi, Fir ek baar loda leke aage khada ho gaya. 
       
       
       Isi beech, chupke se Govind Ballabh Pant ne apni Pant utari, or apna Lund hilake Gandhi ke support me ek resolution pass kar diya. 
       
          Or ye pass bhi ho gaya, kyunki Gandhi se sabki fat ti thi. 
          
          
          Lekin, Fir Gandhi bhola banke bola ki, Kyunki Bose president hai, isliye, Bose ko hi CWC ke members appoint karne ki choot honi chahiye, main nahi bolunga kuch bhi. 
          
          
      Bose ne Gandhi ko samjhane ki koshis ki, Lekin Bose ko nahi pata tha ki Gandhi ne Nehru ka lemon chus liya hai, or Nehru ne Viceroy ka lemon chus liya hai, or Viceroy ne Secy of State ka....
      
      
      Isliye, Bose ne bhi fir, CWC appoint karne se mana kar diya.       
          
          
      Or Bose ne fir, Aakhir kaar Resign kar diya, President ki post se, in April 1939. 
      
      
      Iske baad, Gandhi ke chele Rajendra Prasad ko president elect kar diya gaya.     
          
          
          
          
          
          
             May me, Bose or unke yaaro ne, Unnao ke Makur shahr me, Forward Bloc start kiya-----> As a new party within Congress. 
             
             
                Bose ne fir, AICC resolution ke against jaakar, 9 July ko ek All-India protest karne ko bola. Ye dekh ke to CWC ke chodo ki gaand me missile fat gayi, or unhone Bose par Disciplinary action le daala. 
                
                
                August me, Bose ko Bengal Provincial Congress committee ke president ki post se hata diya gaya. 
                
                Or Yaha bhi CWC ke chodo ka man nahi bhara, to unhone Bose bhai, ko congress ke kisi bhi post ke chunav ladne se , 3 saal ke liye ban laga diya. 
                
                
                
                
          
      Tripuri Session me Congress ne CHina me ek Medical Mission bhejne ka resolution bhi banaya tha.  
       
       
       
       
       
       
       
       September 1, 1939 --> Germany Attacked Poland
       
       September 3, 1939 --> Britain Declared war against Germs
       
       British GoI ne bina Indians ka opinion jane, declared India's support for war. 
       
       
       
       
          Congress Offer to ViceroY
          
          
             - It decided to support the war, conditionally. 2 basic conditions par : 
             
                 i) War ke baad, ek Consi assembly banai jayegi, to determine the political structure of a free India. 
                 
                ii) Immediately, some form of responsible government should be established at the centre. 
                
            Linlithgow (Viceroy) ne offer se apni gand ponch li. 
            
            
            
            
            
     Congress Working Committee ne Wardha Session me ye official position ko adopt kar liya.  Lekin ab bhi saale, lad pade aapas me 
     
       
         1) Gandhi choda, Britain ke saath tha. 
         
         2) Subhash Bose or baaki Socialists (Acharya Narendra Dev, Jayaprakash Narayan)---> Inhe koi side nahi pasand thi.   Inke opinion me war, dono sides par imperialists fight kar rahe the. 
         
             Ye bolte ki, ye ek ideal time hai CDM launch karne ka. 
             
         3) Chota Nehru, Gandhi or Bose, dono ke khillaf tha :   Ise lagta tha, ki Justice was on the side of Britain, France and Poland.    Lekin, ise ye bhi pata tha ki, Britain or France colonial powers hain.     
                    
               Ye bolta, " No Indian participation, till India is free"  , "Lekin, same time pe, CDM launch kar, Britain ki difficulty ko or na badhaya jaye".
               
               
               
              Gandhi akela tha apne stand par.   Lekin, Last me Chote Nehru ke saath ho liya. 
              
              CWC ne bhi, CHote nehry wali position ko adopt kiya. 
              
              
              
              
              
         Lekin, Linlithgow ne 17th October, 1939 me Mulla League or Princes ko Congress ke against use karne ka faisla kiya. 
         
         
                - Govt. Refuse kar diya, British war aims ko define karne se, Bas ye bol diya ki hum Aggression ko resist kar rahe hain. 
                
                - War ke baad dekhenge ki 1935 act ko kaise modify kiya ja sakta hai. 
                
                - Jyada hi hai, to ek "consultative committee" bana dete hain, jis se jab man kare, advice le lena, malai maar ke. 
                
                
                
         Actually, GoI chahti thi, ki War ka fayda utake COngress ko provoke kare,taaki Congress chutiyo ki tarah GoI se confrontation me kud pade, or fir Extraordinary situation ke naam pe, Draconian powers ka use, uski maa chod di jaa sake. 
         
         
           In saalo ne, Is se pehle hi Defence of India act ko amend kar diya tha. 
           
           Or baad me saale, May 1940 me ek Draft ordincance tayyar kiye, Draft Revolutionary Movement Ordinace, taaki Congress ki pre-emptively maa chod di jaa sake. 
                
                
                
                
                
        Gusse me aake, 23 October, 1939 ko, Congress ki minisstries ne resign kar diya. 
        
        
        Linlithgow ki statement ke baad, ek baar fir, Mass Movement ki baate start ho gayi. 
        
        
                        
              
           January 1940 me Linlithgow bola, "War ke baad, Wesminster variety ka dominion status de denge, Bahan ke lodo "
           
           
              
              
              
         March, 1940 me Congress ne Ramgarh me session kiya, Jiska President tha Maulana Abul Kalam Azad. 
         
          
            - "Complete independence ke alawa kuch nahi chahiye". 
            
            - Or jaise hi hamari organisation me jaan aayegi, hum Civil disobedience launch kar denge.      
              
              
              
        Isi beech, March 1940 me Mulla league ne Pakistan Resolution pass kar diya. 
        
        
           
        
        
        
        
        
        
        
        
    AUGUST OFFER
    
    
        - Jaise hi, Hitler ne Belgium, Holland or France par kabja kiya, Britain ke totte ud gaye. 
        
        - Lekin, Fattu Gandhi or Chota Nehru, ab bhi is situation ka fayda uthane ko theek nahi samjhte the. 
        
        - War effort me Indians ki cooperation ke liye, Linlithgow ne August Offer present kiya, In August 1940
        
            1) Objective - Dominion Status
            
            2) Viceroy ki executive council ko expand kar denge, jisme majority Indians honge. 
            
            3) War, ke baad consti assembly bana denge, jisme 'Mainly' Indians apna consti decide karenge. 
            
            4) Minorities ke consent ke bina koi future consti nahi adopt kiya jayega. 
            
            
            
        - Iske Response me Nehru ne apna lemon offer kiya or bola, "Dominion status concept is dead as a doornail". 
        
        
        - Mulla league ne accept kiya, kyunki unhe is se ek tarah ka veto mil gaya tha, or bole ki Deadlock ka ek hi solution hai- Partition. 
        
        
        
        - Lekin, ye pehla time tha, jab, Rights of Indians to frame their own consti ko recognise kiya gaya tha or Congress ki consti assembly banane ki demand ko concede kiya gaya tha. 
        
        
        
        
    July, 1941 me Viceroy ki Executive council ko enlarge kar Indians ko 12 me 8 post de di gayi.    Lekin, Gore abhi bhi Defence, Finance or Home ke charge me the. 
    
    Ek National Defence Council bhi setup ki gayi, lekin iske bas purely advisory functions the. 
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    Individual Satyagraha
    
     
        - Isi beech, GoI ordinance par ordinances laye jaa rahi thi, or logo ke Freedom of speech, press or right to organise associations liye jaa rahi thi. 
        
        - 1940 ke end tak, Congress ne fir ek baar, Gandhi ko bola Command lene ke liye. 
        
        - Gandhi ne Individual basis par limited Satyagrah karne ka man banaya, by few individuals. 
        
        - Aims : 
        
                    i) Ye dikhane ke liye, nationalist patience , weakness ki wajah se nahi hai. 
                    
                   ii) Ye batane ke liye, logo ka war me koi interst nahi hai 
                   
                  iii) Govt ko ek or opportunity dene ke liye, taaki wo congress ki baat man le. 
                  
                  
        - Satyagrahi ki demand hogi--> Anti-war decleration ke through, War ke against freedom of speech demand karna.           
                  
                  Agar GoI ne arrest nahi kiya, to villages me jana, or bande ikathe kar, Delhi ki taraf march karna. -------> 'Delhi Chalo Movement'. 
                  
                  
                  
        - Vinobha Bhave, 1st banda tha, to offer the Satyagraha.     Chota Nehru, 2nd. 
        
        - May, 1941 tak, 25,000 logo ko Individual Civil disobedience ke liye convict kiya ja chua tha. 
        
        
        
        
   Isi beech, Japan ne Asia me dhoom macha di.   GoI ki fat gayi, or usne December 1941 me Congress leaders ko release kar diya. 
   
   
       Ab, ye khangresi bhi Britain ki madad ko raji ho gaye the, India ke defence ke liye.      
       
       
       
       CWC ne Gandhi or Nehru ki objections ko over ride karte hue, a resolution pass kiya offering to cooperate with the Governemnt in the defence of India agar, 
       
          i) War ke baad full independence de di jaye
          
         ii) Substance of power, abhi transfer kar di jaye. 
         
         
       Ye wo time tha, jab Gandhi ne Nehru ko apna successor designate kiya. 
       
       
       
       
       
       
       
    1942 me, ek mission India bheja gaya under Stafford Crpps----> With consti proposals to seek Indian Support for the war. 
    
      Cripps ek Leftist labour ka banda tha,  House of Commons ka leader tha, or British War cabinet ka member bhi tha----> Ye Indian National Movement ko actively support bhi kar chuka tha. 
      
      
      
         Lekin kyu : 
         
                          a) South-East Asia me Britain ki maa chud gayi thi
                          
                          b) Allies Pressur daal rahe the, to seek Indian cooperation 
                          
                          c) Indian nationalists bhi tayyar ho gaye thi Allied cause ko support karne ko. 
                          
                          
                          
                 Main proposals : 
                 
                                  1) Dominion Status ke saath ek Indian Union setup ki jayegi---> Ise adhikar hoga, Commonwealth or UN etc ke saath apne relations decide karne ka. 
                                  
                                  2) War ke baad consti assembly---> Members :- i) Partially elected by provincial Assemblies through PR   ii) Partly nominated by Princes
                                  
                                  3) Brits 2 conditions par constitution ko accept kar lenge :- a) Jo province Union na join karna chahti ho, khudka seperate consti bana sakti hai, or seperate unio bhi
                                                                                          b) Nayi consti making body ke saath British Gov, transfer of power karegi, agar racial/Religious minorites ke rights safeguard hue to         
                          
                                  4) Meantime, Defence of India British haatho me rahega, or GG ke powers Intact rahenge.  
                                     
                          
                               
       
         BC, to isme naya kya tha ? 
         
                1) Mainly nahi Solely Indian hands 
                
                2) Consti assembly ke liye concrete plan diya gaya tha
                
                3) India ki partition ka blueprint bhi de diya tha, wo seperate consit wali baat se
                
                4) Free India , commonwealth se withdraw kar sakta tha
                
                5) Interim period me Indians ko Admin ka kaafi large share diya jaane wale tha. 
                
                
                
         To Cripps mission fail kyu ho gaya ? 
         
                 1) Congress ne object kiya : 
                                                  i) Dominion status ko apni gand me dal lo
                                                  
                                                 ii) Princly states apne nominie kyu bhejenge, elected reps kyu nahi 
                                                 
                                                iii) Provinces ko seced hone ka adhikar---> Ye kya bakchodi hai
                                                
                                                 iv) Koi Immediate transfer of power ka plan nahi hai, na hi defence ka koi shared plan hai.        
                
                
                
                
                 2) Mulla league ne bhi criticize kiya : 
                 
                                                             i) Single Indian Union ke idea ko 
                                                             
                                                            ii) Consti assembly create karne ki machinery nahi pasand aayi mullo ko
                                                            
                                                           iii) Inhe laga ki is se Mullo ko right to self determination nahi milega or Pakistan ka creation nahi ho payega. 
                                                           
                                                           
                                                           
                                                           
                                                           
                 3) Baaki logo ne bhi oppose kiya : 
                 
                             i) Liberals ko secession wali baat nahi pasand aayi, as it was against the unity and security of India 
                             
                            ii) Hindu Mahasabha--> same
                            
                           iii) Neech jaat ko laga ki partition se wo Hinduo ke gulam ban jayenge
                           
                            iv) Sikho ko laga ki Partition se Punjab chin jayega un se. 
                            
                            
                            
                            
                  Gandhi ne is scheme ko "ek post dated cheque" karar diya. 
                  
                  
                                                                     
                                                           
                                                           
           Cripps ke lotne ke baad, Indians ko samajh aa gaya ki Ab Imperialism par final assault ka time aa gaya hai. 
           
           
           
           
           
           
           
           
           
     Quit India Movement
     
     
        Cripps ke wapas jaate hi, Gandhi ne ek Resolution frame kiya----> Calling for British Withdrawl   and a non-violent non-cooperation movement against any Japani invasion. 
        
        
        Wardha(July 14, 1942) me CWC ki meeting me, ye accept kar liya gaya.       
           
           
           
           Lekin kyu ? 
           
                         i) Cripps mission fail hone ki wajah se 
                         
                        ii) War conditions ki wajah se logo ki chudi padi thi
                         
                       iii) Logo ko dar tha ki, japani tel ke dar se, British Assam Bengal and Orissa me scorched earth policy follow karne wale hain. 
                       
                        iv) Brits ki maa chud gayi thi South East asia me. 
           
                         v) Jis ghatiya tarah se Brits ne South-East Asia me withdraw kiya, us se unka racist attitude expose ho gaya. 
                         
                        vi) Japanese Invasion ke liye, logo ko tayyar karna tha. 
                        
                        
                        
             July 1942 me, CWC ne wardha me ----> Gandhi ko Non-violent QIM start karne ko bola. 
             
             
                 - Ise Chote nehru ne propose kiya tha. 
                 - Ise, August me Bomaby me AICC ki meeting me approve kiya jana tha. 
                 
                 
                 
             Quit India Resolution, ko Gowalia Tank, Bombay ki 8th August ki Congress meeting me ratify kiya gaya. 
             
                 i) Demand an immediate end to British rule in India
                 
                ii) Declare commitment of Free India to defend itself from all types of Fascism and Imperialism 
                
               iii) British withdrawl ke baad, ek Provicial Gov of India form karna
               
                iv) British rule ke against ek CDM sanction karna
                
               
               
               
          Ganndhi ne following instructions diye, alag alag sections ko : 
          
          
          
             Gov Servants: Resign mat karo, lekin apna allegiance, congress ko dedo
             
             Soldiers : Army na choro, lekin apne compatriots par fire mat karna
             
             Students : Agar confident ho, to padhai chor do
             
             Peasants: Agar Zamindar, Anti-gov hai, to mutually agreed rents pay karo, nahi pro-gov hain, to rent pay mat karna
             
             Princes : Masses ko support karo, or apne logo ki sovereignity accept karo
             
             Princly State ke logo : Apne ruler ko support karo, only if wo anti-gov hai, or apne aap ko Indian naiton ka part declare karo. 
             
             
             
             
             
        Iske baad, Gandhi ne "Do or Die" ka nara diya.      
             
             
             
             
             
   August 9,1942 ko single sweep me, Congress ke sab top leaders ko arrest kar liya gaya. 
   
    CWC,  AICC or Provincial COngress committee ko Unlawful associations declare kar diya gaya, under Criminal Law amendment act of 1908. 
    
    Defence of India, rule 56 ke under, Assembly of public meeting ko prohibit kar diya gaya. 
    
    
    
    Aruna Asaf Ali, ne 9th August ki Congress committee session ko preside kiya and hoisted the flag. 
    
    
    
    
    
    Usha Mehta ne Bombay me Underground radio start kiya. 
    
    
    
    3 jagah to Parallel Govs, setup ki gayi : 
    
       i) Ballia - Under Chittu Pandey - 1 week ke liye
       
      ii) Tamluk - Under Jatiya Sarkar - 2 saal ke liye
      
     iii) Satara - Y.B.Chavan, Nana Patil etc- 2 saal ke liye
    
    
    
    
    Communists ne Movement join nahi ki--- Inhe India se jyada Russia pasand tha. 
    
    
    
    Mulla league ne Movement ko oppose kiya.  
    
    
    Dindu Mahasabha ne movement ko boycott kiya
    
    Princely states ne jyada jhant nahi khujlai. 
    
    
    
    
    
    GoI ne 10,000 se jyada bande maar diye.    Bohot saari jagah par military took over.   
    
    
              
             
             Outcome : 
             
                             i) Leaders ke bina, movement violent ho gayi. 
                             
                            ii) Storm Centres : Eastern UP, Bihar, Mindanpore, Maharashtra and Karnataka
                            
                           iii) Backbone : Students, workers and peasants,   Upper classes and Brijwasi remained loyal
                           
                            iv) Is se prove ho gaya ki, Nationalism desh ke ang ang me sama gaya hai. 
                            
                             v) It was no longer possible to rule India, without wishes of Indians. 
                             
                            vi) Ab bas Independence Immediate agenda ban gaya national movement ka. 
                            
                           vii) Common people ne unparalled heroism dikhaya. 
                           
                           
                           
                           
                           
        February 1943 me gandhi ne FAst kiya, to condemn violence of the state.                    
             
             Iski wajah se Viceroy's executive council ke 3 members ne resign kar diya. 
             
             
             
        March 23, 1943 ko Pakistan Day banaya gaya. 
        
        
        
        
           1943 me Benal me Famine aa gayi.      
             
             
             
             
                  
               
        C. Rajagopalachari ne Congress-Mulla Cooperation ke liye, C.R formulae diya, in 1944 : 
        
             i) Mulla leage, congress ki independecne ki demand ko endorse karegi
            
            ii) Centre me dono milke provisional government banayenge
            
           iii) War ke baad, NW and NE ke Mulla Majority areas ki saari population, plebiscite se decide karegi, ki Seperate soverign state chahiye ya nahi
           
            iv) Partition ke accept hone par, Defence, COmmerece, communication etc ke liye joint agreemnt banayenge. 
            
             v) Ye sab tabhi hoga, jab England Indai ko full transfer of power de dega. 
             
             
             
             
             
             
        Jinnah chahta tha, Congress 2-Nation theory accept kar le. 
        
          Ye chahta tha, bas NW or NE ke mulle hi, plebiscite me vote karein, entire population nahi. 
          
          Ye common centre ke idea ke bhi opposed tha. 
          
          
          
          
          
     Desai-Liaqat pact : 
     
     
          1) Interim Gov Banane ke liye, dono ne milke ek Draft proposal tayyar kiya : 
          
                a) Congress or League, Equal number of persons nominate karenge, Central Legislature me 
                
                b) Minorities ke liye, 20% seats reserved hongi. 
                
                
                
          2) Loda kuch nahi hua
          
          
          
          
          
          
       Wavell Plan
       
          
          June 1945 me Congress leaders ko jail se chora gaya. 
          
          Europe me war khatam ho chuka tha. 
          
          
          
             Wavell ne June 1945 me Shimla me conference bulwayi. 
             
              
                 i) GG and Commander-in-chief ke alawa, executive council ke sab members, Indians honge. 
                 
                ii) Hindus or Mullo ko equal representation milega. 
                
               iii) Reconstructed council, Interim gov ki tarah fucntion karegi, within the framework of 1935 act (i.e not responsible to Central Assembly)
               
                iv) GG apni veto exercise karga on advice of ministers
                
                
          
          
          
               Mulla League : 
               
                                 i) Ye chahti thi, ki sab Mulla Members, League hi nominate kare
          
                    
                    
               Congress : 
               
                                I) "An attempt to reduce the Congress to the status of a purely caste Hindu party". 
                                
                                
                Wavell's mistake : 
                
                                      Is chutiye ne breakdown of talks announce kar diya, jis se League ko virtual veto mil gaya.   Is se league ki position strength ho gayi.   Is se Jinnah ki position bhi boost hui.   
                                      
                                      
                                      
                                      
                                      
                                      
              September, 1945 me 1st Post-war Congress session hua----> Strong resolution was adopted , declaring congress support for the INA cause.                         
                                      
                                      
                                      
                                      
          February 1946 me 3 cabinet members ka high powered mission bheja gaya, by Atlee Gov --> Pethick Lawrence(Secy of state),   Stafford Cripps    and   A.V.Alexander
          
          
                    To find out ways and means dor a negotiated, peaceful transfer of power to India. 
          
          
                                          
                                      
                Cabinet Mission : 
                
                               1) Pakistan ki demand ko reject kar diya, because of large non-muslim population---> 38% in NW and 48% in NE. 
                               
                               2) Bengal or Punjab ko partition kar diya to deep seated regional ties disturb ho jayenge 
                               
                               3) Economic and administrative chutiyaap start ho jayega. 
                               
                               4) Armed forced ka division bhi dangerous hoga. 
                               
                               5) Existing provincial assemblies ko 3 sections me group kar diya : 
                               
                               
                                           i) Hindu Majority : Section A - Madras, Bombay, CP,  UP,   Bihar and Orissa (HIndu Majority)
                                           
                                          ii) Mulla Majority : Section B - Punjab, NWFP and Sindh
                                          
                                         iii) Mulla Majority : Section C - Bengal and Assam 
                                         
                                         
                                6) 3-tier executive and legislature at provincial, section and union levels. 
                                
                                7) Ek consti. assembly ko elect kiya jayega, by provincial assemblies by PR (Hindu, Mulla, sikh ) .
                                   Ye ek 389 membered body hogi, jisme provincial assemlies 292,  Chief Commissioner's provinces 4 or Princly states 93 membes bhejenge. 
                                   
                                8) Consti assembly me A,B,C groups ke memebers, alag alag baith ke, provinces ke liye consti banayenge, or agar possible hua to pure group ke liye hi. 
                                
                                   Fir, puri consti assembly baith ke, Union consti banayenge. 
                                   
                                9) Ek common centre, Defence, Communications or External Affairs control karega. --> India ke liye ek federal Structure hoga. 
                                
                               10) Communal questions ko dono communites ki simple majority se decide kiya jayega
                               
                               11) Provinces ke pass full autonomy and residual powers hongi. 
                               
                               12) Princly states, British paramountcy me nahi hongi.   Ye baad me successor GoIs ya British gov se agrrement kar sakti hain. 
                               
                               13) First General Election ke baad, Province ko aajadi hogi, Group se bahar aane ki, or 10 saal baad, ek province group ya union consti ke reconsideration ki baat kar sakti thi. 
                               
                               
                                               
                                                               
                                      
          
            British chodo ne kya, bouncer mara, ki sala Congress or Mulla league, dono stunned reh gaye. 
            
               Congress: Pakistan ke na ban ne se khush the,  or ek hi consti assembly ban ne wali thi, or League ko koi veto nahi diya gaya tha. 
               
               Mulla League : Pakistan to implied tha, compulsory groupings me.  
          
          
          
          
          Lekin Congress chahti thi : i) Provinces ke pass choot honi chahiye, groups na join karne ki. (COngress ke dimag me NWFP or Assa the, jaha unki sarkare thi)
          
                                     ii) Compulsory groupins against hai, Provincial Autonomy ke
                                     
                                    iii) Princly states me elected members abhi bhi nahi. 
                                    
                                    
          
                  League chahti thi : i) Groupings compulsory ho, jis se Section B or C, aage chalkar Pakistan ban sake. 
                  
                  
                  
                  
                  
            Mulla league ne 6 june ko, or Congress ne 24 june , 1946 ko Cabinet Mission plan accept kar liya. 
            
            
                  
                 July, 1946 : Consti assemblies ke liye, provinces me elections hue. 
                 
                 
                 July 10, 1946 : Nehru bolta, hum koi compulsory grouping wrooping ko nahi mante. 
                 
                 July 29, 1946 : Nehru ki baat sunke Mulla league ne apna support wapas le liye, or August 16 se "Direct action" karne ki baat ki to achieve Pakistan. 
                 
                 
                 
                 August 16, 1946 : Mullo ne wahi kiya jo ye hamesha se karte aaye hain : Dange-fassad---> Worst hit areas--> Calcutta, Bombay, Noakhali, Bihar and Garhmukteshwar(UP). 
                 
                 
                 
                 
                 
       Ab Wavell, Akeli Congress ko Interim Gov ka part banane ko tayyar ho gaya, Jahe, Mulla League bahar rahe.           
                 
                 Congress wale bhi mass action ki baate kar rahe the:  isliye, Nehru ke under Interim GOv ko sworn in kiya gaya.  In September, 2, 1946.     
                 
                 
                 Lekin, Wavel challaki se chupchaap, Mulla League ko bhi October 26, 1946 ko Interim Gov me le aaya.   
                 
                 
                        Interim Gov ki 14 ministries : (September 2, 1946 se August 15, 1947)
                        
                        
                           1. Jawaharlal Nehru : Executive council ka VP, External Affairs and Common Wealth Relations
                           
                           2. Vallabhbhai Patel : Home, Info and Broadcasting
                           
                           3. Baldev Singh : Defence
                           
                           4. Dr. John Mathai : Industries and Supplies
                           
                           5. C. Rajagopalachari : Education
                           
                           6. C.H.Bhabha : Works, Mines and Power
                           
                           7. Rajendra Prasad : Agri and Food
                           
                           8. Jagjivan Ram : Labour
                           
                           9. Asaf Ali : Railway
                           
                          10. Liaquat Ali khan(Mulla League) : Finance
                          
                          11. Ibrahim Ismail Chundrigar(Mulla League) : Commerce
                          
                          12. Abdur Rab Nishtar(Mulla League) : Communications
                          
                          13. Ghazanfar Ali Khan(Mulla League) : Health
                          
                          14. Jogendra Nath Mandal(Mulla League) : Law
                          
                        
                        
                        
               Consti. Assembly ki pehli meeting me league ne aane se mana kar diya : December 9, 1946
               
               Isliye, Nehru ke under 'Objective Resolution' pass hua----> Ideals, of an independent soverign republic with autonomus units, adequata minority safeguards and SEP democracy. 
               
               
               League ne Cabinet ki informal meetings attend karne se bhi mana kar diay. 
               
               
               
               
               Feb, 1947 me 9 Congress members ne Viceory ko likha ki "BC ye league ke mullo ko samjha lo, nahi to hum resign kar denge". 
               
               
               
               20th February, 1947 ko Celement Attlee ne ek announcement ki :
               
                
                   1) June 30,1948 ki deadline de di---> For transfer of power, chahe constitution bana ho ya nahi. 
                   
                   2) Muslim majority provinces ne consti assembly join na bhi ki to bhi , brits, some form of central gov ko power transfer kar denge.  Ya fir kisi provinces ko bhi. ---> Balkanisation ho sakta hai desh ka.
                   
                   3) Transfer of power hote hi, British powers and obligations, with princly states would lapse. 
                   
                   4) Wavell ki jagah Mountbatten viceroy hoga. 
               
               
               
               
          Mulla League ye statement se itna khush hue ki unhone, Punjab me Coalition governemtn ko overthrow karne ke liye, Civil disobedience movement start kar diya. 
          
          
          
      Iske baad, Sikh or Hindu groups of Punjab walo ne kaha BC, partition karo, taaki hum compulsory groupings ki wajah se Pakistan me naa chale jayen.          
               
               
               
         10th March, 1947 ko Nehru bola : Cabinet Mission best solution hai, or iske alawa==> Partition of Bengal and Punjab.       
               
               
          April, 1947 me Congress President Kripalani ne Viceroy se kaha ----> Ladne se achaa hai unhe Pakistan de dete hain, provided ki tum Bengal or Punjab ka fair tarah se partition karoge. 
          
          
          
          
          
          
      Mountbatten- Viceroy
      
         - Ye firm and Quick decision leta tha, kyunki ise jyada powers de di gayi thi    
          
          
          
          Mountbatten Plan, June 3, 1947 : 
          
          
             - Freedom-with-Partition plan
             
                i) Punjab or Bengal ki legislative assemblies 2 groups me milengi, Hindus and Muslims--> Partition par vote karne ke liye.  
                Agar dono me se kisi ek ne bhi, simple majority se partition par vote kar diya, to provinces ka partition kiya jayega. 
                
                
                
                2) Partition hone par, 2 dominions banayi jayengi, or 2 consti assemblies create ki jayengi. 
                
                3) Sindh, khudka decision lega
                
                4) NWFP or Bengal ke Sylhet district me referendum karwaya jayega
               
                5) Congress ki lagbhag saari baatein man li gayi : 
                
                    i) Princly states ko koi Independence nahi milegi---> They would either join India or Pakistan
                    
                   ii) Independece of Bengal ruled out
                   
                  iii) Hyderabad, Pakistan se nahi mil sakta
                  
                   iv) Ek boundry commission bulaya jayega, agar partition kiya jana hai to. 
                   
                   
                   
             Mountbatten ka plan tha, to divide India but retain, maximum unity. 
             
             
             
             
             
      Congress ne Dominion Status accept kyu kiya : 
      
      
         1) Is se peaceful or quick transfer of power ensure ho jata
         
         2) Congress authority chahti thi jaldi se, taki, explosive situation ko control me kiya ja sake. 
         
         3) Is se Bureaucracy or Army me continuity bani rahti.        
             
             
             
             
             
             
               - Bengal or Punjab ki legislative assemblies ne Partition ke favour me decide kiya. 
               
               - Isliye, East Bengal and West Punjab, joined Pakistan
               
               - West Bengal and East Punjab, remained with Indian Union. 
               
               - Sylhet ke referendum se wo East Bengal me mil gaya. 
               
               - 2 boundry commissions banaye gaye---> For each province
               
               - NWFP me referendum---> Decided in favour of Pakistan
               
               - Baluchistan and Sindh--> Pakistan
               
               
               
               
               
               
               
        5th July, 1947 ko British Parliament ne Indian Independece Act pass kiya, jo Mountbatten Plan par based tha. 
        
         Ise Implement kiya gaya on August 15, 1947. 
         
         
         2 Independent dominion of India and Pakistan bane, with effect from August 15. 
         
         Act ko operationalise karne ke liye, dono dominions ko ek ek Governor General diya gaya.        
               
               
               Dono ki COnstituent assemblies, Legislature ki powers exercise karne wali thi   [Existing Central Legislative Assembly and Council of States ko dissolve kar diya gaya]. 
               
               
               
         Jab tak, naye consti ban nahi jaate hian, tab tak, GoI act, 1935 ke basis pe , dono dominions ki admin chalaya jana tha. 
         
         
            - Jinnah, Pakistan ka 1st GG ban gaya, oR mountbatten India ka.      
               
               
               
               
               
        Integration of States: 
        
        
        
        1946-47 ke beech, Stat People's Movement me naya upsurge aaya---> Demanding Political Rights and Elective Representation in the Consti Assembly. 
        
        
          Nehru ne 1945 me All India State People's Conference Session ko preside kiya, jo Udaipur me hua tha. 
          
          Fir 1947 me jo Gwalior me hua tha, usko bhi. 
          
          
               
              - Bhai ne declare kar diya, ki jo states, Constituent Assembly ko Join nahi karengi, unhe Hostile ki tarah treat kiya jayega. 
              
              - July, 1947 me Patel ne Naye States Department ka charge liya. 
              
                   
                    Patel ke under, States ka Incorporation 2 phases me hua : 
                    
                    
                    
                    Phase I : 15th August, 1947 tak, saare states, except Kashmir, Hyderabad or Junagarh, Instrument of Accession par sign kar chuke the, Indian Gov ke saath. 
                    
                              Kyunki : i) Bas 3 cheeze surrender karni thi : Defence, Communication and External Affairs---> Ye teeno cheeze waise bhi unke pass kabhi thi hi nahi
                              
                                      ii) Internal Political Structure me koi change nahi kiya jana tha (Sykk)
                                      
                                      
                                      
             Phase II :  Jyada difficult process of 'Integration of States with neighbouring provinces, ya into new units like Kathiawar Union, Vindhya and MP, Rajasthan or HP, along with internal consti chnages.                   
                                      
          
          
                           Ye ek saal ke andar andar kar liya gaya. 
                           
                           Unhe Privy Purse ka bait diya gaya, or saare chodo ko Governors or Rajpramukhs bana diya gaya, in free India. 
                           
                           
                           
                           
                              
                                                                        The END
                                                                        
                                                                        
                                                                        
                                                                        
                                                                        
           Constitutional, Administrative and Judicial Developments
           
           
           
           
      Consti. Developments between 1773 and 1858 : 
      
      
         - Battle of Buxar(1764) ke baad, EIC ko Diwani mil gayi, thi Bengal, Bihar and Orissa ki.
         
         - Mughal Emperor Shah Alum II ko annual subsidy di jaani thi, or Nawab of Awad, Shujadi-Dalle-ki, ko bhi annual pension milne lagi thi      
           
         - Company ne 2 deputy dewans appoint kiye - Bengal ke liye, Mohammad Peza Reza Khan   or     Bihar ke liye, Raja Shit-Ab Raj
         
         
            - 1767 me Pehli baar EIC ne Indian Affairs me intervene kiya, jab isne 10% share manga, loot maar me---> Jo saala 40 lakh pound banta tha har saal ka. 
            
            - 1765 se 1772  tak, Dual System of Gov chalta raha, Jaha EIC ke pass authority thi, lekin koi responsibility nahi thi, or Indian chodo ke pass responsibility thi, lekin koi authority nahi thi. 
            
            
                   i) Comany ke servant bhayanak corruption kiya karte the----> Private trading kar, khub dhan kamaya, or saar paisa Bitcoin me invest kar diya. 
                   
                  ii) Peasants ke lode lag gaye, kyunki unse excessive revenue collection kiya jane laga. 
                  
                 iii) Company bankrupt ho rahi thi, lekin servants ke stock hawa me the. 
                 
             - Ye sab  se British gov was like, Dude, WTF is going on, so they decided to regulate the company affairs---> taki business me kuch order aa sake. 
             
             
      Regulating Act of 1773 : 
      
          1) Ye pehla act the, jis se British gov ne Indian affairs me mut-peshab karna shuru kiya----> To control and regulate the functioning of EIC. 
          
          2) Isne recognise kiya ki EIC ke chode, bas trade nahi kar rahe, balki Administrative or Political fields me bhi gand marwa rahe hain, Isliye, is act se Element of Centralised Administration introduce kiya gaya. 
          
          3) Company ke directors ko bola ki, apni saari correspondences regarding, Revenue affairs and civil and military admin, submit karo Governemt ko. 
              
                  (Matlab, pehli baar, British Cabinet ko right diya gaya, to exercise control over Indian Affairs)
                  
          4) Bengal me admin, ke liye Governor-General hoga or ek 4 members ki council hogi, jisme civil or military government ke representatives honge. 
          
          5) Inhe Majority rule ke hisab se function karna hoga.    Warren Hastings or 4 baaki chodo ka naam diya gaya is Act me.   Future me company appoint karegi ye chode. 
          
          6) Bengal me ek Supreme Court of judicature banai jayegi, Jiske pass original and appellate jurisdictions hongi, jaha sab subjects, redressal ke lie tareekh pe tareekh mang sakte hain. 
          
          7) GG, ke paas thodi powers hongi, Bomaby or Madras se related bhi. 
          
              Puri Scheme, Checks or balances par based thi. 
              
              
              
      1781 me is act me Amendment ki gayi : 
      
           1) Supreme Court ki jurisdiction define ki gayi :-   Within Calcutta---Ye defendant ke personal law ko adminster karegi. 
           
           2) Governments ke servants ko immunity di gayi, ki saala agar apni duty perform kart karte koi rape vape ho jaye to, koi court kachehri ka chakkar na pade. 
           
           3) Subjects ke social and Religious randaap ka dhyaan rakha jaye. 
           
           
           
           
      1784 me Pitt's India Act, pass hua : 
      
      
             1) Is act se, British Gov ko, Company Affairs ke upar kaafi saara control mil gaya. 
             
                Infact, Company subordinate kar di gayi, Department of State ke. 
                
                Company ki India me territories ko, 'British Possessions' kaha jane laga. 
                
             2) Ek Board of Control banayi gayi, jisme Chancellor of exchequer tha, Secy of State tha or Privy Council ke 4 chode bhi the(Inhe Crown appoint karne wala tha). 
             
                 Ye Company ke Civil, military or revenue affairs par control karne ke liye, banai gayi thi. 
                 
                 Saare dispatches ko Ye board approve kiya karta tha.
                 
                 Matlab, BC yaha bhi ek Dual System of Control Setup kiya gaya. 
                 
                 
             3) India me, GG ko 3 logo ki council de di gayi, jisme Commander in Chief bhi hona tha. 
             
             4) Bombay and Madras presidencies ko Governor-General ke Subordinate kar diya gaya. 
             
             5) Aggressive wars or treaties par ek general prohibition laga di gayi thi. 
             
             
             
             
     Act of 1786, labaik-Ya-Rassul-Allah
     
          1) Cornwalis the Coward, Governor-General or Commander in Chief dono ki powers chahta tha.  Is act se iski ye wish puri kar di gayi, considering isne kitne josh se Amrica me british territories ko defend kiya tha. 
          
          2) Cornwalis the coward, ko allow kar diya gaya, ki tu chahe to Coucnil ke decisions se apni gand poch sakta hai, kyunki isne bohot hi bahaduri se America me British forts ko defend kiya tha. 
          
             ( Baat me ye over-riding powers sab GGs ko di jaane lagi )
             
             
             
          
    Charter Act of 1793 
    
        1) Company ke commercial privileges ko 20 saalo ke liye, renew kar diya gaya. 
        
        2) Comapany, apne kharche pure karke(Dividends, Interests, Salaries, Expenses etc),  British Sarkar ko har saal 5 lakh pounds diya karegi. 
        
        3) Governor General, Governors, Commander-in-chief ki appointment ke liye, Royal Approval Chahiye hoga. 
        
        4) Company ke senior officials ko bol diya, ki saala Khabardaar koi bina permission ke India chor ke gaya to.   Ye saale, Nepali rande chodne nikal jaya karte the. 
        
        5) Company ko power de di, licenses issue karne ki--Katto ke liye nahi chutiye,   India me trade karne ke liye, to it's employees and other Indians. 
        
           In licences ko 'Privilege' ya 'COuntry trade' bulate the, or inhi ki madad se inhone, China ko Smakiya bana diay, opium pila pilake. 
           
        6) Judiciary se Revenue Admin ko seperate kar diy, is wajas se 'Maal Adalats' band ho gayi. 
        
        7) Home Government members ko Indian revenues se tankhwa milne lagi, or ye randaap, 1919 tak chala.
        
        
        
        
        
    Charter Act of 1813
    
    
          1) 'Laissez-Faire' ki spirit me or Napolean ke Continental system se hue nuksaan ki wajah se British chode, ye demand karne lage ki saala Comapnay ko di hui monopoly ko hataya jaye. 
          
          2) Company's monopoly over trade in India was stopped except: Trade with China and Trade in Tea. 
          
          3) Company ke shareholders ko 10.5 % dividends diya gaya, India ki revenue ka. 
          
          4) 20 or saalo tak, Comapny ko possessions , Territories and revenues in India, extend kar di gayi. 
          
                (Consti. position of British Territories in India was defined explicity for the 1st time)
                
                
          5) Board of Control ki powers ko or bhi enlarge kar diya gaya. 
          
          6) Indians ki education ke liye, 1 lakh rupees set aside karo
          
          7) Councils of Madras, Bombay and Bengal ke jo bhi regulations hain, wo sab ab British Parliament ke aage rakhe jaane lage.      
                         
          8) Commercial transactions or Territorial Revenues ke liye, Separate accounts bana. 
          
          9) Christian missionaries ko allow kar diya, to go and preach their religion. 
          
          
          
          
    Charter Act of 1833
    
          1) Company ki lease 20 saal or extend kar di gayi.      India ki territories ko Crown ke naam par govern kiya jana tha. 
          
          2) Trade with China and Trade in Tea ko wali monopolies ko bhi hata diya gaya. 
          
          3) Europeans ke upar lage hue saare restrictions hata diye gaye, jaao or India me properites khareedo. 
          
          4) India me Financial, Legislative and Admininstrative centralisation of Government was envisaged : 
          
              i) GG ko power de di gayi to superintend, control and direct all civil and military affairs of the company. 
              
             ii) Bengal, Madras and Bomaby or baaki sab territories ko Governor-General ke complete control ke under kar diya gaya. 
             
            iii) Saare revenues, GG ke authority se collect kiye jaane lage, or GG ke pass expenditure ka bhi complete control tha. 
            
             iv) Madras or Bombay se unki legislative powers cheen li gayi. 
             
          5) GG ki council me ek Law member ko add kiya gaya, taki law-making par professional advice diya ja sake. 
          
          6) Indian laws ko codify and consolidate kiya jana tha. 
          
          7) Religion, Color, birth, descent ke basis par Kisi Indian Citizen ko employment deny nahi ki jayegi. 
          
          8) Slavery khatam karo---> It was abolished in 1843. 
          
          
          
          
    Charter Act of 1853. 
    
       1) Jab tak parliament kuch na bataye, tab tak territories, company ke pass hi rahengi. 
       
       2) Court of Directors ki strength ko kam karke 18 kar diya gaya. 
       
       3) Open Competitive examination for services
       
       4) Law member, koi GG's executive council ka full member bana diya gaya. 
       
       5) 6 naye members add kiye gaye for Legislative purposes---> is se GoI ke Executive or Legislative functions ka seperation ho gaya. 
       
       6) Indian Legislature me local representation ko introduce kiya gaya.     Legislative wing ko Indian Legislative council kaga jane laga. 
       
       7) Lekin, kanoon ko GG ki assent chahiye hoti thi, or GG chahe to law ko veto bhi kar sakta tha. 
       
       
       
       
       
   Act of Better Governemnt of India, 1858 
   
   
    - India ko Crown ke naam pe govern kiya jayega, through a Secy of State and a Council of 15.   Council was advisory in nature. 
    
        (Ise se Pitt's India act wala dual system khatam ho gaya)
        
        
    - GG, Viceroy ban gaya. 
    
  
  
  
  
  
  
  Consti. Developments after 1858 till 1947. 
  
  
  
       Indian Councils Act, 1861
       
       
          1) Legislature ko ek seperate function ki tarah treat kiya jane laga.    Non-officials ko legislative bodies me representation di jaane lagi. 
          
          2) Canning ke portfolio system, se Cabinet government ki foundation rakhi gayi.    Har branch ka khudka ek official head hota tha or GoI me ek spoksman, jo uske admin ke liye responsible hota tha. 
          
          3) Gov, of Bombay or Madras ko unki legislative powers lota di gayi. 
  
          4) Lekin is act se jo Legislative councils bani, unke pass koi jyada powers nahi thi---> Wo important matters discuss nahi kar sakti thi, or Financial matters se to unhe 10 kadam door rakha jaat tha. 
            
            Budget par koi control nahi tha,   Koi executive actions ko discuss bhi nahi kar sakte the,    Sab bill karne ke liye, Viceroy ki approval chahiye hoti thi.     Or saala agar Approval mil bhi jaye to Secy of state, loda ada deta tha.    
                Or JIn Indians ko as non-official members ke liye, appoint kiya gaya wo sab elite sections ke memebers the. 
                
                
                
                
      Indian Councils Act, 1892
      
      
          1) Ye congress ko khush karne ke liye laya gaya tha---> Taaki, councils me non-official members ka number badhaya jaa sake. 
          
          2) Indian legislative council ko enlarge kiya gaya. 
          
          3) Principal of Representation introduce kiya gaya : Zamindars, Universities, District Boards, Muncis, Trade Bodies, Chambers of Commerce wagarh ko bola ki Provincial councils me apne members recommend kare. 
          
          4) Indirect election ka ek element introduce kiya gaya--- Non-Official members ke selection me. 
          
          5) Leislatures ko allow kiya gaya, financial statements par apne views dene ko.
          
          6) Kuch questions puchne ke liye bhi allow kar diya gaya. 
          
        
        
                   
  
  
  
  
   Evolution of Civil Services in India
   
   
       1) Cornwallis the Coward(1786-93) 
       
            - Ye pehla banda tha, jisne Civil Services ko existence me laya or organise kiya. 
            
            - Isne Corruption check karne ki koshis ki : 
            
                i) Civil Servants ki salaries badhake
                
               ii) Private trade karne walo ki nasbandi karwake
               
              iii) Presents, Bribes lene wale Civil Servants ki bhi nasbandi karwake
              
               iv) seniority based promotion
               
               
      2) Wellesley The Fuckboy (1798-1805) 
      
             - 1800 me Fort Williams College banaya, Naye recruits ki training ke liye. 
             
             - Lekin Court of Directors ke chodo ne 1806 me Wellesly ke college ko disapprove kar diya. 
             
                 - Haileybury me East India College setup kiya gaya. 
                 - Recruits ko 2 saal ki training di jaati thi
                 
      3) Charter Act of 1853
      
             - Company ki patronage cheen li gayi, or Open competition ke through Civil servants ki recruitment ki jaane lagi. 
             
             - Lekin Indias ko barred kiya hua tha, high posts occupy karne se.     
                 
                            
  
     4) Indian Civil Services Act, 1861
     
             - Is act se, Conveneanted Civil servants ke liye, kuch offices reserved kar diye gaye.    Lekin, Examination, England me jaake deni padti thi, wo bhi English me, based on Classical Greek and Latin. 
             
             - Maximum permissible age ko reduce kar 22 kar diya gaya tha, 1860 me, fir 21 in 1866 me or BC 1878 me to bas 19 saal kar diya gaya tha. 
             
             - 1863 me Satyendra Nath Tagore, pahle Indian the jisne Indian Civil Service ke liye Qualify kiya. 
             
             
             
             
      5) Statutory Civil Service
       
           - 1878-79 me Lytton ne Statutory Civil Services introduce ki----> 1/6th of covenanted posts ko Ache gharo ke Indians ke liye, through nomination by local Govs. 
           
           - Lekin ye ghatiya system fail ho gaya, or abolish kar diya gaya. 
           
 
           
           
           
           
      6) Indian National Congress ne Demands ki :  
          
                   i) Sala age limit theek karo
                   
                  ii) Examination India me bhi karwao
                  
                       
           
          Isliye, Defferin ne --> Aitchison Committe on Public Services(1886) banai. 
          
              
                   - 'Covenanted' or 'uncovenanted' wala randaap khatam kar diya gaya
                   
                   - Imperial Indian Civil Services(Examination in England) and Provincial Civil Services(Examination in India)  and Subordinate Civil Services(Ye bhi India me)  ----> In teen me classify kar diya
                   
                   - Age limit badha ke 23 kar di gayi. 
                   
                   
                   
                   
            1893 me , House of commons ne ek resolution pass kiya, jis se simultaneous India or England me examination hone lage======> Lekin, Bhadwo ne ye resolution kabhi implement hi nahi kiya. 
            
            
                   
                   
                    
           
                   
     7) Montford Reforms(1919) 
     
           1) "Agar India me responsible Gov laani hai, to Public service me jitne jyada Indians ho utna acha hai". 
           
           2) Simultaneous Exams hone chahiye India or England me. 
           
           3) 1/3rd Recruitments India me hi honi chahiye===> Har saal 1.5% se badha dena chahiye. 
           
           
           
     8) Lee Commission (1924) 
     
     
            1) Secy of State ko hi, ICS, Engineering Services ki Irrigation branch or Indian Forest Services ke officers recruit karte rehne chahiye. 
            
            2) Education or Civil Medical Services jaise Transfered fields ke liye, Civil Servants ki bharti, Provincial Governments ko de deni chahiye
            
            3) 15 saal ke andar andar ICS ki direct recruitment se 50:50 European-Indian Parity achieve kar li jani chaiye
            
            4) Public Service Commission banao, jitna jaldi ho sake. 
            
            
     9) GoI Act, 1935
     
        
            1) Federal or Provincial Public Service commissions banao. 
            
        
        
        
        
                     
                    
             
     Modern India me Police System ka Evolution 
     
     
     
     
       - Pre-Colonial times ki Govs, Autocratic hua karti thi----> Inke pass koi alag se Formal Police system nahi tha. 
       
       - Lekin, gaanvo ko raat me protect karne ke liye, Watch guards hua karte the. 
       
       - Mughals ke time me, Faujdaar hua karte the, to maintain Law and Order
       
       - Inke alawa Amils hua karte the, jinka kaam to revenue collection tha, lekin ye rebels wagarh se bhi lode lete rehte the. 
       
       - Cities me Kotwal hota tha law and order ke liye. 
       
       - 1766 se 1772 ke beech Dual rule ke time bhi, Zamindars hi thanedar rakha karte the, law and order duties ke liye. 
       
       - 1770 me 'Faujdaar' or 'Amils' wala randaap khatam kar diya gaya. 
       
       - Lekin, 1774 me Warren Hastings ne sasti charas ke nashe me, Faudar ke institution ko restore kar diya, or Zamindars ko bola, ki saalo sab milke, daaku logo se lado, jao. 
       
       - 1775 me, Bhai ne sasta nasha nahi chora, or Major towns me 'Faujdar thanas' establish kiye---> Or inhe assist karne ke liye, chote-chote, nanhe munhe police stations banaye. 
       
       
       
       
    1791 : Cornwallis the Coward ne Regular Police Force Start kiya, to maintain law and order-----> Isne, Purana, Thanas(Circle) wala system hi revive kiya tha.----> District me thana hota tha under a Daroga. 
    
           Head of District hota tha--> Superintendent of Police (SP)
           
           Isne Zamindars, ko bola ki bhai tumse naa ho payegaa, or aayenda koi police duty karta hua dikha to uski maa chod di jayegi. 
           
           
           
           
    1808 : Mayo naam ke Mayo khane wale chode ne,   Har division ke SP appoint kiya or unki help karne ke liye, 'Goyendas' naam ke jassus appoint kiye.   Lekin ye Goyendas, logo ke saath Goyenda-Gardi karte the. 
    
    
    1814 : Court of Directors ke ek order se, Bengal ke alawa jaha jaha company ki possessions thi, waha sabse, Darogas ki appointment + Unke subbordinates, ko abolish kar diya gaya. 
    
    
    
    1828-35, Bentick ke time :   Is bhai ne to SP ke office ko hi abolish kar diya. 
    
                                - Collector/Magistrate ko hi apni jurisdiction me Police Force head karne ko bola. 
                                
                                - Har division me jo Commissioner tha, abse wahi SP ki tarah act karega. 
                                
                                - Lekin is se bohot hi ghatiya tarah se organised police force bani---> Collector/Magistrate par bhayanak burden aa gaya. 
                                
                                
                                
     1860 me ek Police Commission bani, or uski recommendation se---> 1861 me Indian Police Act pass hua. 
     
            1) Civil Constabulary ka ek system ho---> Jis se Existing village setup hi maintained rahe(Har village ka apna watchman)---> Lekin ye direct relationship me ho, with the rest of Constabulary. 
            
            2) Province ka head hoga- Inspector General,     Range ka head hoga- Deputy Inspector General      and     District ka head hoga- SP. 
            
            
            3) Is se, police ne Daaku or Thug logo ki maa chodna shuru kar diya. 
            
               Lekin, logo se ache se baat nahi karte the. 
               
               Or, National Movement ko kuchalne me bhi inhone  aham bhumika nibhai. 
               
            4) British logo ne koi All-India Police Service nahi banai. 
            
            5) Is act ki guidelines se bas Provinces ke liye Police Setup present hua tha. 
            
            
            
     1902 me ek or Police commission bana
     
          1) CID establish karo, provinces me 
          
          2) Central Intelligence Bureau banao, Centre me 
          
          
          
          
          
          
          
          
    Military Under the British 
    
     
       - Company rule ki backbone thi Military
       
       - 1857 revolt se pehle, 2 seperate tarah ki military force operate kiya karti thi, British Control ke under. 
       
              i) Queen's Army : Serving Troops on Duty in India---> Ye Crown's Military force ka part the
              
             ii) Company's Troops : Mixture of European and Indian Regiments(Recruited locally but with British officers)
             
       - 1857 ke baad--> Revolt ko prevent karne ke liye, Army ko reorganise kiya gay. 
       
                         Indian army ka use karke, Empire ka defence kiya jana tha, baaki imperialist powers se-- Russia, Germany, France etc
                         
                         Indian branch of Army se Asia or Africa me expanision kiya jana tha
                         
                         British Section ka use kiya jana tha as an Army of occupation
                               
                   
              1) Dominatio of European branch over Indian Branch was ensured. 
              
              2) 1859 or 1879 ke commissions ne insist kiya tha: 1/3rd White army(is se pehle bas 14% the) 
              
              3) Proportion of Euro:Indian---> i) 1:2 in Bengal Army     ii) 2:5 in Madras and Bombay army
              
              4) Strict European monopoly over, key geographical locations and departments such as Artillery, tanks and Armed corps was maintained. 
              
              5) 1900 tak Indians ko jo rifles bhi di jaati thi, wo inferior quality ki hoti thi. 
              
              6) 2nd WW tak, Indians ko kisi High-Tech department me bhi nahi allow kiya jata tha. 
              
              7) Officer Ranks me bhi Indians ko allow nahi kiya jata tha. 
              
              8) 1914 tak, Indian banda, highest Subedar hi ban sakta tha.  (1918 ke baad se commissioned ranks me Indians ko allow kiya jane laga)
              
              9) 1926 me Indian Sandhurst committee visualize kar rahi thi 50% Indianised Officer Cadre for 1952 (LoL)
              
              
              
       Lord Roberts ke under, 1880s ke baad se, 'Martial Race' wala chutiyaap bhi start kar diya gaya. 
       
           - Sikhs, Gurkhas and Pathans---> Jinhone Revolt crush kiya tha---> Martial Race
           
           - Awadh, Bihar, Central India and South India wale--> Jinhone revolt kiya tha--> Non-Martial 
           
           
              Sab Regiments me Caste and communal companies introduce ki gayi. 
              
              
              Newspapers, Journals, Nationalist publications wagarh pe ban lagake, Soldiers ko Rest of India se isolate kiya jata tha. 
              
              
              
                     
              
              
              
    Development of Judiciary in British India
    
    
      - Common law system, based on Judicial precedents start hua tha----> 1726 me jab, Bombay, Madras and Calcutta me 'Mayor's courts' banaye gaye the, by EIC. 
      
      
      - Jab, EIC ek Trading company se Ruling power ban gayi, to Existing Mughal legal system ko naye Judicial system se replace kar diya gaya. 
      
      
      
   Warren Hastings(1772-85) ke under reforms : 
   
      1) Districts me civil disputes ka niptara karne ke liye, District Diwani Adalats banai gayi. 
      
            Inhe Collector ke under rakha gaya tha.----> Dindus ke liye, Dindu law   and Mullas ke liye Mulla qanoon. 
            
            District Diwani Adalat se appeal jaati thi, Sadar Diwani Adalat------> Ye function karti thi ek President ke under, or Supreme Council ke 2 members ke under. 
            
            
      2) Or Criminal Disputes ka niptara karne ke liye, District Fauzdari Adalats banai gayi----> Inhe Indian officer ke under rakha gaya, jinhe assist karte the, Mufti or Qazis. 
      
            Ye adalats bhi, Collector ki general Supervision ke under hoti thi. 
            
            Mulla qanoons ko Fauzdari adalats me nipta jaata tha. 
            
            Kisi ki gardan utarne ke liye, ya Property confiscate karne ke liye, Mushidabad me located, Sadar Nizamat Adalat se permision leni padti thi-----> Ise Deputy Nizam head karta tha(Indian Mulla) 
            
            
            
            
      3) 1773 ke regulating act se--> Calcutta me ek Supreme court banai gayi-----> Ise allowed tha Calcutta ke saare British Subjects ke cases niptara karne ka. 
      
          Iske pass original and appellate jurisdictions thi. 
          
          Lekin kafi baar, iski jurisdictions baaki courts se clash kiya karti thi. 
          
          
          
                
      4) Cornwallis the Coward (1786-93) ke under reforms            
               
          
             - District Fauzdari Adalts ko abolish kar diya gaya. ------> Inki jagah, Calcutta, Dacca, Murshidabad or Patna me Circuit courts establish kiye gaye. 
             
             - In circuit courts me European judges hua karte the-----> Ye dono, civil or criminal cases ke liye, COurt of appeals ki tarah kaam kiya karte the. 
             
             - Sadar Nizamat Adalat ko Calcutta me shift kar diya gaya----> or Governor General(Yanhi khud coward ke under) ke under kar diya gaya-----> Ise CHief qazi or Chief mufti assist kiya karte the. 
             
             - District diwani Adalat ko ab----> District, City ya zila courts ke naam se bulaya jaane laga----> Inhe district judge ke under place kar diya gaya. 
             
             - Collector se uski Magisterial powers cheen li gayi, ab uske pass bas revenue admin ki responsibility thi. 
             
             
             - Matlab Civil Courts ka level tayyar ho gaya : 
             
                  i) Munsiff's court under Indian officers
                  
                 ii) Registrar's court under a European Judge
                 
                iii) District court under the district judge
                
                 iv) 4 circuit courts as provincial courts of appeal
                 
                  v) Sadar Diwani Adalat at Calcutta
                  
                 vi) King-in-Council for 5000 pounds se jyada ki appeal ke liye
                 
                 
           Cornwallis the coward's code : 
           
               1) Revenue or Justice Administration ka seperation 
               
               2) European subjects ko bhi jursidiction ke under laya gaya
              
               3) Government officials ko answerable bana diya gaya, Civil courts ke for actions done in their official capacity
               
               4) Principle of Sovereignity of law was established
               
               
               
               
      William Bentinck ke under ke Reforms( 1828-33) 
      
      
          1) 4 circuits court ko abolish kar diya gaya---> Inke functions ko transfer kar diya gaya collectors ko, under the supervision of commissioner of Revenue and circuit. 
          
          2) Allahbad me Sadar Diwani Adalat and sadar Nizamat Adalat were setup
          
          3) Courts me ab Persian ki jagah English use ki jaa sakti thi, or Supreme Court me English language replaced Persian
          
        
        
        1833: Macaulay ke under law commission setup kiya gaya---> Indian Laws ko codify karne ke liye.
         
            Is wajah se : 1859 me Civil Procedure Code
            
                          1860 me Indian Penal Code                  laye gaye
                                                     
                          1861 me Criminal Procedure Code            
                     
      
      
      
        1860:   Criminal Cases ke alawa, Gore koi special privileges claim nahi kar sakte. Lekin, Indian Orgin ka koi judge, unhe try nahi kar sakta
        
        1865:   Supreme Court or  Sadar Adalats ko merge karke, 3 high courts banai gyi a Calcutta, Bombay and Madras
        
        1935:   GoI act---> Federal Court(jise banaya gaya 1937 me) ---> Could settle disputes bw Governments and could hear limited appeal from High Courts. 
        
        
        
        
    Evaluation: 
    
        Positives aspects: 
        
              i) Rule of Law was established
              
             ii) Codified laws ne religious or rulers ke personal laws ko replace kar diya
             
            iii) European subjects ko bhi jurisdiction ke under le aaya gaya.  (Lekin, Sala criminal cases me inhe bas European Judges hi try kar sakte the)
            
             iv) Govt servants ko Civil courts ke samne answerable bana diya gaya. 
             
         Negaticve ASpects : 
         
         
                i) Judicial system bhayanka complicated or expansive ho gaya---> ameer log, system ko manipulate kar sakte the. 
                
               ii) False evidence, Deceit karne ka ample scope tha
               
              iii) Dragged out litigation---> Delayed justice
              
               iv) Jaise jaise litigations badhe, Courts overburdened ho gayi. 
               
                v) Bohot baar, Gore judges, Familiar hi nahi hote the, Indian usages or traditions ke. 
                
                
                
                
                
                    
        
        
             
          
    Major Changes in Adminstrative Structure after 1857
    
    
       New Stage of Colonialism : 
       
        
           - Masses ki administration se alienation kam karna jaroori tha, taaki sala dobara revolt na kar de chutiye log. 
           
           - Natives, ko administration se associate karke, rulers ko bhi natives ke baare me kaafi kuch pata chal jayega. 
           
           - 1850s ke baad se or bhi nayi colonial powers aa gayi---> Raw material, Market for mfg goods and capital investment, ke liye, cut-throat competition chal raha tha.              
                                          
           - Finance or Mfg goods ke trade me british supremacy khatam ho gayi thi. 
           
           - Is stage pe, kaafi large scale British Capital investment hua Indian railways or Loans to GoI.   Smaller extent me, Tea-plantations, Coal-mining, jute mills, shipping, trade or banking me bhi. 
           
           - In sab factors ke combination se start hua : New Stage of colonialism in India.                      
    
    
    
    
    
           
      Lord Mayo ne 1870 me, khub saara nasheela mayo khaya jis wajah se use Indians par daya aa gayi : --->Central Revenues se Fixed sum of money, for Admin of Certain services like Police, Jails, Education, medical, roads etc      
           
           to Provincial Governments. -------> Ye pehla step tha, to bifurcate, Central and Provincial Finances. 
           
              Provincial Governments ko fir mayo ne bola, "dekho bhai, ye paise pakdo, or jaise use karna hai karo". 
              
              
       Lord Lytton ne 1877 me thode or Heads of Expenditure, jaise ki Land revenue, Excise, Genreal Admin, law and justice etc Transfer kar diye, Provinces ko. 
       
       
       1882 me Sab sources of Revenues ko 3 groups me divide kiya gaya---> General(jo bas centre ko jaate the), Provincial(Jo bas provinces ko jaate the) and those which were divided bw Centre and Provinces. 
       
       
       
       
              
    Local Bodies : 
    
           
          Local bodies ko promote kar admin. ko decentralise karne ka plan banaya gaya. ----> Through Muncis and District Boards. ----> Ye local services admin karne wale the jaise ki--> Education. Health, Sanitation, Water Supply, Roads or baaki basic amenities. ---> Jinhe Local taxes se hi finance kiya jana tha. 
          
          
            Lekin kyu ? 
            
               a) Overcentralisation ki wajah se Central Govs financial difficulties face kar rahi thi
               
               b) Europr me is time, civic amenities me bhayank teji se modern advances ho rahe the. 
               
               c) Nationalists chode, Basic facilities ko apna agenda banaye hue the. 
               
               d) Indians ko admin. me bharti kar, Indians ki increasing politicisation ko check kiya ja sakta tha. 
               
               e) Local taxation se local welfare se ek to criticism bachta dusra, ameer bhadwo ki jeb par bhi sankat na ata(Through increased taxes)
               
               
       1864 or 1868 ke beech : Pehli baar local bodies banai gayi---> lekin in sabme nominated members the, or inhe District magistrate head karta tha. 
        
                               Inhe bas additional tax collection ka jariya samjhte the log. 
                               
                               
                               
                               
              Mayo ne Nashe wala Mayo khake, 1870 me resolution kiya : -    Imperial Gov se annual grant milega. 
                         
                                                                            Provincial Govs ko bhi authorise kiya jata hai, local taxation se apna budget balance karlo. 
                                                                            
                                                Aisa kiya gaya, kyunki, is se pehle kai saare departments, provinces ko transfer kiye ja chuke the- jaise ki medical services, roads, education
                                                
                                                Ye shuruat thi, local finances ki.                          
                 
                 
                                Nashedi Mayo khane wale Mayo ki baato me aakar---> Bengal, Madras, MWFP, Punjab ki provincial govs ne, Munci acts pass kiye, is policy ko implement karne ke liye. 
                 
                 
                 
                 
              Ripon's Resolution of 1882 : "Mayo bhai ne jo financial decentralisation, apni gov se tumhari(Provinvial Govs) or kiya tha, ab wahi kaam tum log local bodies ki taraf karo"                
       
                - Is contribution ki wajah se Ripon ko- "Father of Local-Self Government in India" kaha jata hai. 
                
                
                         1) Local Bodies ka development karo, taki admin improve ho, or ye as an instument of political and popular education ban sake. 
                         
                         2) Local affairs ko Urban and local bodies ki madad se hi administer kiya jaye---> Jinke pass definite duties ho, or suitable source of revenue bhi ho
                         
                         3) Non-Officials majority me ho, in bodies me----> Jinhe elect bhi kiya ja sakta hai, agar, officials ko lage ki elections karwaye ja sakte hain, to
                         
                         4) Non-Officials hi in bodies ke chairpersons honge. 
                         
                         5) Official interference bilkul minimum honi chahiye
                         
                         6) Kuch cases me executive sanctions chahiye ho : Loans lene ke liye,  Naye taxes impose karne ke liye,  Rules or Bye-laws frame karne ke liye, Ek amount se jyada ke kharche karne ke liye
                         
                    
                  In sab rules ko follow karne ke liye, kaafi saare acts pass kiye gaye---> 1883 or 1885 ke beech----> Inse Munci bodies, ki consti, powers or functions kaafi had tak change ho gaye. 
                  
                  
                     Lekin, In bodies ke bhi bhayanak drawbacks the : 
                     
                        1) Elected members, laghbhag har district me minority me the
                        
                        2) Franchise kaafi limited thi
                        
                        3) District boards par ab bhi district officials hi kabja kiye hue the
                        
                        4) Govt ka jab man aata tab, wo in bodies ko suspend ya supersede kar deti. 
                        
                        
        Infact, Curzon chode ne to Local Bodies par offical control badhane ke liye, kai steps liye. 
        
        
        
        
        
  1908 ki Royal Commission on Decentralisation : 
  
  
      - Financial resources ki kami, sabse bada stumbling block hai, in local bodies ke effective fucntioning ke. 
      
      - Recommendations : 
      
             i) Village panchayats ko or powers do, jaise chote mote cases niptane ki,  Minor village works, Schools, Fuel and fodder,  ke liye kharche badha do.
             
            ii) Panchayats ko adequate source of income do
            
           iii) Sab talukas and tehsils me, Sub-district boards establish karo, jinki alag duties or alag income ke sources ho
           
            iv) Existing taxations par lage restrictions hatao, Regular grant-in-aids do, large projects undertake karne ke liye
            
             v) Muncis ko bolo ki saala Primary education ki responsibility tumhari, or ho sake to middle-vernacular school ki bhi. 
             
             
             
             
     Govt. Of India Resolution of 1915 :
     
         Decentralisation Commission ke recommendations ke upar jo officials ki soch thi, wo is act me contained thi. 
         
         Lekin loda kuch implement nahi hua, or jaisa Ripon bhai chorke gaye, the, waisa hi sab chalta raha. 
         
         
         
     May, 1918 ka resolution: 
     
          20 August, 1917 wali announcement ko dhyan me rakhte hue, Local self-govs ko puri tarah se question kiya. 
          
             - "Local bodies ko jitna jyada representative banaya ja sakta hai utna achaa hai". 
             
             
             
     Dyarchy ke under: 
     
          - Transferred subject tha, under popular ministerial control. 
          
          - Har province ko allow kiya, local self-govs instis  develop karne ko according to provincial needs and requirements. 
          
                                     
          - Lekin, bhadwo ne, Finance ko 'Reserved' subject bana rakha tha--Under the charge of executive councillor, to Indian ministers loda kuch nahi ukhaad paye. 
          
          
          
          
          Simon Commission (May 1930) ne bhi bola ki kya ghatiya progress hui hai, except in UP, Bengal and Madras. 
          
          
            -  In chutiyo ne recommend kiya- Increasing provincial control over local bodies for the sake of efficiency. 
            
            - Inhone ye bhi bola ki, saale elected members koi naye local taxes nahi lagate hain
          
                or, ki 1919 ke reforms introduce hone ke baad, local bodies ki financial situation or bhi ghatiya ho gayi hai. 
                
                
                
         1935 ka GoI act       
          
          
            - Provincial Autonomy se local self-govs ki development ko bal mila. 
            
            - Ab funds bhi milne lage. 
            
            - Provinces me naye acts pass kiye gaye, jinse local bodies ko jyada authority mil sake. 
            
           
          
          
          
          
          
                
        
  Labour log : 
  
  
     - Maje ki baat : Lancashire Textile capitalist lobby ne , demand kiya pehli baar India ki factories me Condition of workers ko regulate kiya jaye. 
     
     
     - Pehla Commission appoint hua, 1875 me, or Pehla act pass hua 1881 me. 
     
     
           1) Indian Factory act of 1881 : Primarily Child labour se nipatne ke liye: 
           
                     - 7 se kam ke bacho ki employment par rok
                     
                     - Bachoo ke liye working hours restricted to 9 hours only
                     
                     - Bachoo ko har mahine kam se kam 4 din ka avkaash
                     
                     - Hazardous machinery ko properly fence off karke rakho
                     
                     
                     
           2) Indian Factory act of 1891 :
           
                      - 7 nahi 9 saal
                      
                      - 9 nahi 7 ghante
                      
                      - Aurat ke liye 11 ghante
                      
                      - Hafte wale din, sabke liye chutti
                      
              
            Lekin or bhi jyada maje ki baat : Inme se koi bhi kanoon, British-owned tea and coffee plantations par nahi apply hota tha=====> Jaha labour ko ruthlessly exploit kiya jata tha.                        
     
     
             
             
                   
       
       
       
       
       
       
    Development of India Press : 
    
    
       - James Augustus Hickey ne 1780 me Bengal Gazette a.k.a Calcutta General Advertiser start kiya---> It was the 1st Newspaper in India. 
       
           Ise 1872 me seize kar liya gaya.    
       
       
       
       
        Censorship of Press Act, 1799
        
          - Wellesly the Fuckboy ko lag raha tha ki French Invasion honi wali hai India me . 
          
          - Is chode ne laghbhag, wartime, press restrictions impose kar diye, including pre-censorship. 
          
          - In restrictions ko Lord Hastings, ke under relax kiya gaya. Ye thoda progressive banda tha. 
          
          
        Licensing Regulations, 1823
        
           - John Adams---> Reactionary choda--->    i) Starting or using a press without a licence was a penal offence. 
           
                                                    ii) Baad me is act ko extend kar--> To cover journals, Pamphlets and books 
                                                    
                                                   iii) Mainly Indian language newspapers ke against thi
                                                   
                                                    iv) RamMohan roy ke Mirat-ul-Akbar ko publication rokni padi. 
                                                    
                                                    
           - 1835 ke Press Act or Metcalfe Act
           
                                                                                  
                     - Metcalfe bhai ne us Chutiye John Adams wale ordinance ko hataya-----> He became "Liberator of the Indian Press"
                     
                     - Bas ye bata do kis jagah pe publish kar rahe ho.
                     
                     Iske baad se rapid growth hua, Newspapers ka. 
                     
                     
                     
          - 1856 ka licensing Act : 
          
               Licencing restrictions in addition to the already existing registration procedure laid down by Metcalfe Act. 
               
               
               
          - 1867 ka Registration act : 
          
          
                 Ye bas regulatory nature ka tha, na ki restrictive nature ka. Isne 1835 ke Metcalfe act ko replace kiya.      
               
               
                         
           
          
          
          
          
   EDUCATION
   
   
              
       1) Warren Hastings ne 1781 me Calcutta Madrasah khola----> Sharia padhne ke liye
       
       2) Jonathan Duncan ne Benaras me Sanskrit College khola--> Hindu law and philosophy padhne ke liye
       
       3) Fuckboy ne 1800 me Fort Williams college khola---> Civil Servants ko train karne ke liye
       
       4) Macaulay's Minute - 1835---> Anglicists jet gaye---> Western science and literature through the medium of English Language alone
       
       5) James Thomson, NWFP ka Lt.Governor the---> 1843 se 1853 tak----> Comprehensive scheme of village education develop ki---> Through medium of vernacular languages.    
          
       6) 1854 ka wood's dispatch : Magna Carta of English Education in India         
                                     
                       - GoI ko bola to assume the responsibilty of education of masses. 
                       
                       - Bottom pe, Vernacular primary schools in villages --->Anglo-Vernacular High Schools + ek affiliated college at district level---> Affiliating Uni in presidency towns of Calcutta, Bombay and Madras           
          
                       - Higher Studies ke liye, English as the medium of instruction      and     Vernaculars at school level
                       
                       - Female and vocational education par stress and on teacher's training
                       
                       - private enterprise ko encourage karne ke liye system of grant-in-aid
                       
                       
                       
                       
           1857 me Calcutta, Bombay and Madras me Universities banai gayi----> Fir, Dept. of educations banaye gaye, sab provinces me. 
           
           
           1849 me Bethune schools aaye---> Girl Education ke liye. 
           
           
           
           Bihar ki Pussy, sorry Pusa me Agriculture Institute bana
           
           Roorkee me Engineering Institute.      
          
          
          
          
          
     1857 ke baad education : 
     
        
          1882 ki Hunter Education Commission : 
          
              - Purani Schemes ne Primary or Secondary educations ko neglect kiya tha. 
              
              - Jab 1870 me(Mayo bhai ki jai) Education ko provinces ko shift kiya gaya, to primary or secondary education ko or bhi lode lag gaye. 
              
              - 1882 me, Ripon bhai ne W.W. Hunter ki chairmanship ke under, ek commission appoint ki---> To review the progress of education in country since the Despatch of 1854. 
              
              - Hunter report, bas primary or secondary education tak hi confined thi. 
              
                  i) Primary education me State ki special care ki jarurat hai
                  
                 ii) Primary education, vernacular me hi di jaani chahiye
                 
                iii) Primary education ka control, abhi abhi bane, District or Munci boards ko de dena chahiye. 
                
                 iv) Secondary(High School) education ke 2 divisions hone chahiye : 
                  
                       a) Literary---> Leading up to University
                       
                       b) Vocational --> For commercial careers. 
                       
                 v) Female education ki females ki tarah hi chudi padi hai. ---> Specially presidency towns ke bahar to bura hi haal hai. 
                 
                      
         Agle 2 decades me, Secondary and collegiate education ka rapid growth hua. 
         
         Jyada teaching-CUM-Examining Universities were setup like the Punjab University(1882) and Allahabad University(1887). 
         
         
         
         
         
   1904 wala Indian University Act :
   
       20th CE khatam hone ke saath saath political unrest start ho gaya tha. 
       
       Officials sochne lage the ki saala, ye Private mgmt ke under quality of education ghatiya ho gayi hai. 
       
       Or ye educational instis na hua, balki factories hain, jo political revolutionaries produce kar rahi hain. 
       
       
          Nationalists bhi mante the ki, education ki quality me decline aaya hai. ----> Lekin, GoI bhi loda kuch nahi kar rahi illetracy kam karne ke liye. 
          
          
             1902 me University students ke lene ke liye, Raleigh Commission setup kiya gaya. 
             
               Ise bola tha, ki Primary or Secondary education ke baare me agar dekhne gaye to aapki bhi le li jayegi. 
               
               Iski recommendations par, 1904 ka Indian Universities act pass hua tha. 
               
                  i) Universities ko jyada attention dena chahiye, Study or research par
                  
                 ii) Ek university ke number of fellows kam kar diye gaye the, or Unke office ka period bhi ghata diya gaya tha, or jyadatar fellows ko Government nominate karti thi. 
                 
                iii) Gov. ke pass power aa gayi, to veto university ke senate ke regulations and could amend these regulations 
                
                 iv) Private collages ke affiliation ki condtions strict ki jani chahiye
                 
                  v) Agle 5 saalo ke liye, 5 lakh/annum sanction kiye jane chahiye for dvpt of higher education and Universities. 
                  
                  
          Curzon bhadwa bolta ki, Universities par jyada control chahiye, to ensure quality and efficiency.
          
          Nationalist bolte--Ye to tatti hai----> Attempt to strength imperialism and to sabotage nationalist feelings. 
          
                      Gokhale ne ise ek "Retrogade measure" bataya. 
                      
                      
                      
                      
                              
          1906 me Baroda ki progressive state ne Compulsory primary education introduce ki, throughout its territories. 
          
          National leaders ne urge kiya Government se, to do so for British India----> Gokhale ne aise karne ke liye, Powerful advocacy ki, in Legislative assembly.                    
          
                 
             
             
       1913 me GoI ne Resolution on Education policy issue kiya:    i) Nahi Nahi hamse compulsory education na ho payega
       
                                                                   ii) Lekin illetracy hatane ki koshish karenge. 
                                                                   
                                                                  iii) Provincial govs se anurodh hai ki wo gareeb and ati-pichda bachoo ko free primary education dene ka kashth karein. 
                                                                  
                                                                   iv) Secondary schools ki quality achii ki jayegi. 
                                                                   
                                                                    v) Har province me ek University bana dete hain, kyuu theek hai na Gokhale ji ? 
                                                                    
                                                                    
                                                                    
                                                                    
        1917 ka Saddler University Commission : 
        
                i) To study and report on the problems of Calcutta University---->Lekin iski recommendation, baki universities me bhi applicable thi. 
                
               ii) Isne sab---> School Education se University education tak pura analyse kiya
               
                  - University educaiton me improvement ke liye, Secondary education me improvement necessary pre-condition hai. 
                  
                  - School course 12 saal ka hona chahiye. 
                  
                  - Students, Intermediary stage ke baad, university me enter kare. 
                  
                  - Secondary or Intermediate education ke liye alag se boards banaye jayein
                  
                  - University regulations frame karne me kam rigidity honi chahiye
                  
                  - University IITs ki tarah Centralised, Residential type honi chahiye, na ki RTU ki tarah scattered affiliated collages. 
                  
              
              
            1916 se 1921 ke beech, 7 naye Universitites banaye gaye---> at Mysore, Patna, Benaras, Aligarh, Dacca, Lucknow and Osmania
            
            
            1920 me Government ne Saddler report ko Provincial Govs ko recommend kiya.                                                                   
             
             
                 
                 
                   Dyarchy ke under education : 
                   
                       GoI ne education me interest lena band kar diya, kyunki education ko provincial ministries ko shift kiya ja chuka tha. 
                       
                       GoI ne grants dene bhi band kar diye. 
                       
                       Lekin, Phillanthropic efforts ki wajah se education fir bhi grow karti rahi. 
                       
                       
                       
                       
                       
            Hartog Committee (1929)
            
            
                Schools or Colleges ke increased numbers ki wajah se education standards ki maa chud gayi. 
                
                Is committee ko development of education ke upar report karne ko bola tha. 
                
                
                    - Primary educatio par emphasis hona chahiye, lekin education me koi hasty expansion ya compulsion ki jarurat nahi hai. 
                    
                    - High school or intermediary stage par bas, deserving students hi jane chahiye---> Avg students ko 8th class ke baad, vocational cources me laga do. 
                    
                    - University education ke standards me improvements ke liye, admissions ko restrict karo. 
                    
                    
            
            
            
            
            Sergeant Plan of Education: 
            
             
                Sereant, Govt ka educational advisor tha---> In 1944
                
                
                      i) Pre-Primary education for 3-6 year age group
                      
                     ii) Free universal and compulsory elemantary education for 6-11 years age group
                     
                    iii) High School education for 11-17 years age group for selected children
                    
                         Higher secondary ke baad, 3 saal ka university course. 
                         
                     iv) 2 type ke high schools : i) Academic  ii) Techinal and Vocational
                     
                      v) Intermediate course ka aboltion
                      
                     vi) 20 saalo me adult illiteracy ka liquidation
                     
                    vii) Teacher training par stress
                    
                    
              Iska objective tha, 40 saal ke andar andar, England jaisi educational attainment.       
                                   
                    
                    
           
           
           
           
                                           						India After Independene
                                           								
                                           								
                                           								   
           
   Independence ke time, India kuch 51 International Organistaions ka member tha, or kuch 600 treaties sign kar chuka tha. 
   
   1st World War ke baad India ne, Treaty of Versailles bhi sign ki thi. 
   
   1920s me India, league of Nations ka founding member bhi tha, Same for International Labour organistion and International Court of justice. 
   
   India ne Washington conference on Naval Armaments 1921-22 me bhi participate kiya tha. 
   
   1920 ke baad se hi London me ek Indian High commissioner tha. 
   
   1st WW se pehle hi, Indian nationals ko kuch diplomatic posts bhi di gayi thi. 
   
   Independence ke baad, Indians, most influential non-western contingent the, UN or uski allied agencies me.         
           
                                                                        
                                                                        
        1954:- Panchsheel  or the 5 priciples of peaceful co-existence with China.                                                                 
          
          
        1955 : Bandung Conference of 29 Afro-Asian Countries.---> 10 principles of International Peace. 
        
          
        1961 , Conference of Non-Aligned Nations in Belgrade : Accepted panchsheel as the basic principles of Non-aligned movement. 
        
                         
                        
                        
                        
                        
                        
                 
        Cold War
        
        
           1945 me USA ne Nukes tests kiye. 
           
           1949 me USSR ne bhi khudke, nukes test kiye.       This started Cold War. 
           
           
           
           
           
           
           Principles of Non-Interference in the domestic affairs of other countries and maintenance of one's own sovereignity----> Crystallised into Non-Allignment. 
           
           
  0         
           Non-ALligned is not the same as neutrality. 
           
           Non-allignment has relevance both in times of war and peace. 
           
           Neutral country ke koi opinions hi nahi hote. 
           
           
           
           
           
     1st Chief Election commissioner of India : Sukumar Sen--> an ICS officer. 
     
                    
                 
        Elections karwane ke liye, Parliament ne 2 laws pass kiye : 1) RPA, 1950 :   VOters ki qualification      Electoral rolls           States ko House of people me seats allocate ki gayi   
        
                                                                    2) RPA, 1951 :   Qualification/Disqualification of Members        Elections ka conduct       Poll expenses        Poll itself        Counting of votes etc
                                                                    
                                                                    
                                                                    
                                In laws ke pass hone ke baad hi eletoral mahinery could be put in place. 
                                
                                
           1st general Election, is wajah se October 15, 1951 me hi karwaye ja sake. 
           
            
               Lok Sabha me jo 489 seats bhari jane wali thi, unme se 72 seats SC walo ke liye, or 26 seats ST walo ke liye reserved thi. 
               
               
               
               States ki legislative assemblies me total seat---> 3283 thi or 192 thi Scheduled Tribes ke liye. 
                                                                                 
                 
                 
                 
             Elections, Universal Adult Franchise ke basis pe hue----> 24 saal se jyada ke logo ko Right to vote tha. 
             
                17 crore, 32 lakh, 13 hazaar, 635 log enroll hue vote dene ke liye. 
                
                
                Inme se 45% Aurate thi. 
                
                
                Us time India ki population, 35 crore hi thi.    Matlab laghbhag 49% population ko enroll kar liya gaya tha. 
                
                
                
                
                
        Chunav se pehle, Shyama Prasad Mukherjee broke away and started Bhartiya Jan Sangh (Pro-BJP)
        
           BRA ne Scheduled Castes Federation revive ki----> Later named Republican party. 
           
           J. B. Kriplani ne Kisan Mazdoor Praja Party start ki. 
           
           
           Ram Manohar Lohiya or Jaya Prakash Narayan  ne Socialist party banai.
           
           BC, commie kutte bhi Telangana me armed struggle khatam kar, chunav ladne lag gaye. 
           
           
           
           
           Lok Sabha seat ke 1st General Election ne 53 political parties ne participate kiya. 
           
           Inme se 14 National Parties thi. 
           
           Total 1874 candidates the, Jinme se 533 independents the. 
           
           
           
           
           INC ne 472 seats par chunav lada tha, or 364 me unhe jeet mili. 
           
           CPI ko 16 seats mili or Socialist party ko 12. 
           
           BJS ko 3 seats mili. 
           
           
           
           
           BRA bechara Bombay se haar gaya.   Lekin BRA entered Parliament as a Rajya Sabha Candidate. 
           
           Kriplani bhi haar gaya, lekin uski lugai jeet gayi. 
           
           
           
           
           
           
           
           Congress ne Sab states me bhi maa chod di--> Formed Govs in all the states. 
           
           
           
           
      June 1948 me Constituent Assemble ne Linguistic Provinces commission setup kiya,headed by Justice S.K. Dhar----> TO enquire into the need of linguistic provinces. 
      
         Dhar ne linguistic provinces ke idea ko dhara ka dhara raha gaya,  National Integration ke khilaaf hai ye to.      
           
           
       December 1948 me hi, Congress ne JVP committee appoint ki with Nehry, Patel and Sitaramayya as it's members. ----> J V P report. ----> Isne bhi bola BC koi linguistic states nahi honge.     
           
           
                   
                    December 1952 me Potti died. And all hell broke lose. ----> Govt ne git, October 1, 1953 me Andhra State banaya--> Seperated from Tamil Speaking Madras State. 
                 
                 
                 
                 
                 
                 
                 
                 
                 
                 
                 
                 
                 
                 
                 
                 
                 
                 
                 
                 
                 
                 
                 
            Nehru ne 1953 me States Reorganisation commission banaya---> Unjer Justice Fazl ALi,     K.M.Panikkar        and        Hridaynath Kunzru-------> October 1955.      
                 
                 
                 
                 
                 
                 
                 
                 
                 
                 
                 
                 
                 
                 
                 
                 
                 
                 
                 		
                               					       
                  
                  
                       
                 
                 
                 
                 
                 
                  
                  
                  
                  
                  
                  
                  
                  
                  
                  
                     
          
               
                    
               
               
               
               
               
               
               
                
             
             
             
             
             
             
             							PP History
             							
             							
             							
             
                        
         Isme, Shuru me bohot saari 'Medieval Terminologies' di gayi hain, unhe ek baar dekh lena chotu. 
         
         
          Babur ne Mughal Empire FOund kiya tha, 1526 AD me.       1550s ke baad, Akbar ke under, massive expansion hua tha.   
          
          
          Aurangzeb Chodumal(1658-1707) ke baad se decline start ho gaya. 
          
          	- Chode ki religious policies  + Maratha, Bijapur or Golconda walo ke against campaign ne bhi finances ki maa chod di. 
          	
		- Weak successiors + Wars of Succession
		
		- No military reforms  +  New tech nahi liye,  Saare commanders mar gaye, civil wars me. 
		
		- 1738 me pehle to Marathas ne,  Fir, Nadir Shah ne aake, Mughals ko apna lemon taste karwaya. 
		
		- 1748 me Afghaniyo ne invade kar diya, lekin, SHukar hai, ise repeal kar diya gaya. 
		
		- Lekin, Abdali ke under, Afghaniyo ne Punjab par kabja kar liya. 
		
		- 1761 me Abdali, ne Marathas ko bhi lemon taste karwaya. 
          	
          
          
          Akar ke mansabdari system me, Mansabdars ko --->   Cash me pay kiya jata tha (Naqdi-mansabdari)   ya fir     jyadatar cases me, Jagir/Landed state de di jaati thi, jiske revenue(jama) se wo apne kharche chalata tha. 
          
          2 tarah ki jagirs thi : Tankha jagir  +   Vatan Jagirs
          
          Jyadatar jagirs, transferable thi. 
          
          Sab appointments, transfers,  postings, Emperor karta tha, isliye, pura "patron-client" relationship tha.   Isliye, koi national-loyalty naam ki cheez nahi thi. 
           
           
          Mughal Empire ki 4/5th land-revenue income, Mansabdars ke control me thi.  Lekin,   8000 mansabdars me se, bas 445 ne 61% par kabja kar rakha tha.  
           
          Aurangzeb ke baad se, Expansions band ho gaye the. 
          
          Bijapur (1685) me capture kiya tha, or iske 4 saal baad, yani 1689 me Golconda bhi.   Iski aristocracy, mughal courts me include ho gayi, jinhe Deccani kehte the. 
          
          
          Mughal Nobility ko waise, "Khazazads" bulaya jata tha. 
          
                                                           
          Or, resources ke lalach me, jagirs ke liye, ladte the, saare groups aapas me - Turani, Irani, Indian Mulle, Dindu, Deccani, Afghani etc.  ----> "Jagirdari Crisis" of 18th CE. 
                                                           
                                                           
               - Wo Area jise Jagir ke tor par distribute kiya jana tha : 'Paibaqi' 
               
               - 18th CE me, ye decline hone laga tha. 
               
               - European Markets ke khul jaane ki wajah se, Commodities ke price me bhi increase ho raha tha. 
               
               - Matlab, Randibaaji karne ke liye, paise nahi mil rahe the. 
               
               - Or, ye dar rehta tha, ki pata nahi sala, kab aake koi transfer kar de. 
               
               - Aurangzeb choda, Apne khud ka, yani Royal Land a.k.a Khalisa ko expand kiye jaa raha tha.   Wo iske use se, Deccan Campaign finance kar raha tha. 
               
                
                
          - Bahadur Shah ne, Khalisa land ko distribute karne ki koshis ki, lekin is se, Khud kangaal ho gaya. 
          
          - Nizam-ul-mulk, jab wazir bana, tab usne, Communist Manifesto padh ke, land redistribute karne ki koshish ki, lekin, is se court ke log bhadak gaye, or bole, "Better Dead, then Red". 
          
         
         
         
         
         
         		Zabt Area : Jahan par detailed Land survery kiya gaya tha --> Yaha par land revenue 1/3rd of the produce tha. 
         		
         			    Lekin, Gujrat jaise fertile area me to ye sala, 3/4th tha. 
         			    
         			    
                
               - Rajput log, Mughals ke lemon chusne ke badle, unhe fixed payments kiya karte the, jise 'Peshkash' kehte hain. 
               
               - Primary zamindar log ko ----> Mulgujari  kehte the --> Inke through revenue collect kiya jata tha, or badle me inhe, 'Nankar' yani revenue-free land milti thi. 
               
               - Zamindars ke neeche, peasant log hote the, 2 tarah ke : i) Khudkasht : Jinke pass occupancy rights the       ii) Pahikashts : Vagrant peasants. 
               
               - Zamindar, inhi ki caste ka hota tha, or sala khud ki small army type or even forts type bhi rakhta tha. 
               
               - Inke cooperatoin ke bina, mughal log, jhant nahi ukhad sakte the. 
               
               - Aurangzeb ke marne ke baad, in logo ne bhi apne aand dikhane shuru kar diye the. 
               
            
            
            
            
            Bahadur Shah ke time, ek alag hi kism ka randaap start hua : Ijaradari system ka 
            
               - Deccan me, bohot saare jagirdari,  Maratha Sardars se compromise kar ke, peasants se jitna man kare utna revenue extract karne lage. 
               
               - Ye chode, Revenue Official a.k.a Amil se pehle hi advance le leta tha, jo fir jaakar, Peasants ke aand masalta tha. 
               
               - Is se bhi logo ka man nahi bhara, to saalo ne, Revenue-collection rights ko Highest bidder ko de diye jaate the---> Is se short period me maximum revenue squeze kiya jata tha. 
               
               - Farukhsiyar ke time to, Sala Khalisa land tak ko Ijaradar log ko dene lag gaye the. 
               
               
            
            
            
            
            
            
            Bengal : Jab, 1717 me Murshid Quli Khan, Governor appoint hua (By Siyar Bhai)
            
            	     - Ise, Diwan or Nizam, dono appoint kiya gaya.   Diwan = Revenue,   Nizam = Governor
            	     
            	     - Quli ke bad, Sarfaraz aaya, jiske baad aaya, Alivardi Khan. 
            	     
            	     - Alivardi ne hi, finally Mughals ko "Fuck Off" bola tha. 
            	     
            	     - 1751 me, Alivardi ne Maratha lemon chus liya, or Chauth dene laga Bangal ke liye, or Orissa ko bhi Marathas ke hawale kar diya. 
            	     
            	     	- Marathas ke wajah se, NW se Inland trade khatam ho gaya, jis wajah se Brits baniye, kaafi powerful ho gaye the. 
            	     
            	     
            	     - 1756 me Alivardi allah ko pyara ho gaya, to uske pote, yani 'Siraj-ud-dalla-lundbahadur' ko appoint kiya. 
            	     
            	     - 
                
                
                
       Hyderabad : 1724 me found hua tha, by Nizam-ul-Mulk-Hulkbadamshake   ---> Ye Turani Party ka leader tha. 
       
       			- Jab, Sayyid ne Siyyar Bhaiya, ki maa chod di, tab ye dar ke maare Hyderabad bhaag gaya.  in 1719
       			
       			- Isne, fir Irani logo ko chodu banakar, Sayyids ki bhi maa chod di, or Muhammad Shah ko Ruler bana, khud uska wazir ban gaya, from 1722 to 1724. 
       			
       			- Iske marne ke baad Asaf Jah ban gaya, nizam. 
       			
       			- Iske baad, Nizam ali khan aaya, jo 1803 tak raha. 
       			
       	
       	
       	Awadh : Saadat khan, ko 1722 me Governor appoint kiya tha. ---<> Yahi Choda, Burhan Ul-Mulk kahalata tha. 
       	
       	        - Nadir Khan ke invasion wale din, 1740 me ye zahar khaake mar gaya tha. 
       	        
       	        - Safdar Jung ko Nadir Shah ne appoint kiya tha. 
        
        	- 1754 me, iske pote, Shuja-ud-dalla ko Governor appoint kiya gaya, by Alamgir II.
        	
       
       
       
       
       Jab Guru Nanak, Sikhism start kar raha tha, tab, babur Mughal Empire Start kar raha tha, in 1469. 
       
       		- 1675 me Aurangzeb ne 9th Guru ka Sar Kalam kiya. 
       		
       		- 1699 me, Guru Gobind Singh ne, Khalsa Start kiya. 
       		
       		- 1708 me, Guru Gobind ko mar diya gaya, to Banda Bahadur kud pada maidan me. 
       		
       		- 1716 me, Banda ko Delhi me maar diya gaya (RiP Bro)
       		
       		- 1760s tak, Misls ban chuke the. 
       		
       		- 1790s me, Ranjit Singh ne sabko unite kar diya. 
       		
       		- Treaty of Amritsar se, Brits ne Ranjit Singh ko, Sole Soveriegn Ruler of Punjab recognise kiya. 
       		
       
       
       
       
       Rajput log, Mughals ko 'Peshkash' dete the --> Annual tribute, as a mark of subordination. 
       
       
       
       
       British EIC : 31st December, 1600 ko charter mila, east me trade karne ka. 
       
       		- Pehli Factory setup karne ki permission di, Jahangir ne, 1613 me in Surat. 
       		
       		- 1617 me, Thomas Roe, Jahangir ke court me resident ban gaya. 
       		
       		- 1661 me, Charles II ko Portuguese ne Dahej me Bombay diya, jise usne 1668 me EIC ko de diya, 10 pound salana kiraye ke liye.  1687 me, Presidency HQ ko Bomaby shift kiya gaya, from Surat.  
       		
       		- Ye sab "Treaty of Whitehall" ke under hua tha, jiske hisab se, Brits or Portuguese, saath milkar, Chrystal se ladenge. 
       
       		- 1690 me. Aurangzeb ne, Bengal me, Duty-free trade karne ko allow kiya, saalana Rs 3000 ki payment par. 
       		
       		- 1690 me hi Calcutta found hua, or 1696 me, uska fortification kiya.  Iske baad, 3 gaanvo ki zamindari ka right mila --> Kolikata, Suranuri and Gobindpur. 
       		
       		- 1717 me Siyaar Bhai, ne apna Farman issue kiya : i) Duty free trade karo, chodo     ii) Calcutta ke around 38 villages rent pe lelo, chodo    iii) Royal Mint use karo, chodo, kyunki tumhare mu se baans aati...
       		
       		- Lekin, is farman se Brits or Quli ke beech, muka laat shuru ho gayi---> Quli was like, "Bokachoda, ye duty free trade wala provision, tumhari maa..err mera matlab, tumhare private traders ke liye nahi hai". 
       		
       		- Lekin, Comapany was like, "Deez Dustaks, Naboob". 
       		
       		- 1740 me, Austrian War of Succession start ho gaya--> Alivardi khan ne, French or Brits ko bola, "Bokachoda, yaha koi ladta dikh gaya to aand jala dunga". 
       		
       		- 1755 me, Brits ne firse, Calcutta ko Fortify karna shuru kar diya. 
       		
       		- Ye, saale, Naboob ke court se bhaage Fugitives ko protect karne lage, Calcutta me. 
       		
       		- 1756 me, Dalla Nabbob bana. ---> Isne, Dastak ke misuse ko rokne ki koshih ki. 
       		
       		- Dalle ne, Kaismbazar ki Factory par kabja kar liya. 
       		
       		- Dalle ne, fir 20 June ko Calcutta par attack kar diya. 
       		
       		- Robert Clive, Madras se Forces leke pahonch gaya.  
       
       		- Naboob court ke Dindu merchants, 'Dadani Merchants' ki tarah act karte the. ----> Interior se Brits ko textiles supply karte the, for advances or Dadan. 
       		
       		- Jagat Seths ne, Siraj ko Mir Jafar se replace karne ka man bana liya. 
       
       		- June 1757 me, Plassey ki ladai hui, jisme Clive ne, Dalle ki maa chod di. 
       		
       		- Dastak ke chutiyaap ki wajah se, 1760 me, Jafar ko Kasim se replace kar diya, jo uska Son-in-law tha. 
       		
       		- Lekin, 1763 me, Dastak wale chutiyaap ki wajah se hi, Kasim ne, Saari Duties hi abolish kar di, jis se Indian traders ko bhi fayda hone laga. Lekin, Brits ne gusse me, Kasim ko Jafar se firse replace kar diya. 
       		
       		- Kasim, Bengal se bhag gaya, or Shah Alam II + Shuja-ud-Daula of Awadh se alliance kar liya. 
       		
       		- Lekin, 1764 me, Battle of Buxar me, teeno ki Gaand lal kar di gayi. 
       		
       		- 1765 me Treay of Allahbad sign hui : Shah Alam ne, Company ko BOB ki Diwani de di.   Shuje, ne Rs 5 million diye,      Defend each others territories,     Brit resident at court.   Duty-free trade in Awadh
       
       
       
       
       
       
       
       French : Last to arrive, First to start creating a territorial Empire. 
       
        	- Pondicherry found kiya, in 1674. 
        	
        	- Governor of Chandernagor appoint hua, Dupleix in 1731.    1742 me, ise Pondicherry ka charge mila.    Yahi pehla Euro fag, tha jisne local randaap me lund adana shuru kiya tha. 
       
		- 1740 me Austrian War of succession start hua. 
		
		- French chodo ne josh me aake, Madras par attack kar diya. ---> Is se 1st Carnatic War start hua. ----> Angrez log ne, Naboob of Carnatic se madad mangi, jiski French ne maa chod di.        
       
       		- Treaty of Aix-La-Chappelle se, ladai khatam ho gayi. 
       		
       		- 2nd Carnatic War, Indian chutiyaap ki wajah se start hua, both in Carnatic and Hydrabad. ---> French ko Carnatic Chanda, or Hyderabadi Jung chahiye tha. Or dono jeet bhi gaye. 
       		
       		- Hyderabad ke naye Gov, Muzzaffar Jung ne French chodo ko, Norther Sarkars, Masulipatman or Pondicherry ke aaspass ke gaanvo ki jagir dedi. 
       		
       		- Is se Brits ki gaand me aag lag gayi. Calcutta se Clive doda doda aaya, 2nd Carnatic War start karne in 1752. 
       		
       		- Brits jeet gaye, or Muhammad Ali ko Carnatic ka throne mila. 
       		
       		- Dupleix ne koshis ki wapas lene ki French positions, lekin French Gov tabtak tang aa chuki thi, or use 1754 me wapas bula liya.  Ise 'Godeheu' naam ke chode se replace kiya, jisne aate hi Brits se treaty kar li. 
       		
       		- Iske baad, 1756 me, Europe me, 7 years war start ho gaya.   Count de Lally + Bussy, dono ki maa chud gayi.  
       		
       		- 1760 me Battle of Wandiwash hua. 
       
       		- 1763 me Treaty of Paris se, Frenchs ko wapas mil gayi saari possessions. ---> But they could not fortify chandernagore. 
       		
       		
       		
       		
       		
       		
       Pitt's India Act,1784 se hi, Brits chodo ko mana kiya tha, Territorial Expasion karne se. 
       	
       	- Lekin, Fuckboy bhai ke India aane se, in 1798, sab change ho gaya. 
       		
       	- Bhai ne, French ka dar dikha ke, 'Subsidiary Alliance' naam ki policy start ki. 		
       
       	- Bhai, ko 1805 me wapas bula liya gaya, kyunki bhai ke kaand ki wajah se, EIC ke financial lode lag gaye the. 
       		
       	
       
       
       1813 me, Lord Hastings leke aaya---> "Paramountcy" wala randaap. 
       
        
        
        
        
        
       1797 me, Brits ne Awadh ke Nawab ke succession me interfere karke, dhan luta. 
        	
        	- 1801 me, Fuckboy ne, aadhe Awadh par kabja kar liya, as permanent payment of subsidy.           
    
    
    
     	1830 me Cachar par kabja kiya. 
     	
     	1834 me, Lord Bentinck ne Coorg par kabja kiya. 
    
    	Dalhousie bhai ne, Hyderabad se Berar cheena tha, 1853 me, payment na kar paane ki wajah se. 
    
    
    
    
    
    
        
        
        1813 ke Charter act se -----> Christianization of India began. 
        
        
        1833 ke Charter act se -----> Free-Trade began. 
        
        
        	- 1817 me, James Stuart Mill ne, "History of British India" naam ki book likhi thi.   Ye banda ek, Benthamite-Utilitarian tha. 
        	
        	- Is bande ki wajah se hi, 1833 me Lord Macaulay ke under, ek Law Commission appoint hui thi. ---> 1835 ka IPC bana---> Benthamite model of Centrally, logically and coherently formulated code 
        	
        		- Lekin, ye act bana tha, 1860 me. 
        	
         	- Lord Bentinck, bhi Mill ka follower tha. 
        
        
        
        
        
        
        
        
          1766 me Parliament ki intervention ke baad, Company ne agree kiya to pay, 4lakh pouns annually to the British Government. 
                
                
                
       	  1773 me Clive par, or 1786 me Hastings par Mukaadamma chala, or 1806 me Fuckboy bhai par bhi. ---> However all three were unsuccessful. 
        
        
        
        
        1772 me Company financial crisis me chali gayi, or Britis GOv se loan mangne lagi, jiska fayda uthake, Gov ne Company ke affairs ko regulate karna start kar diya. 
        
              
              - Isi Time, Adam Smith ne 'Wealth of nations' naam ki kitab likhi, or monopolies ko maa bahan ki gaali di. 
                 
              - Lekin, as a compromise, Company ko allow kiya, monopolise karne ko, lekin, some sort of accountablity was created. ---> Directors of the company were given control of the Indian Adminstration. 
       
              
         1773 me, Regulation Act leke aaye : 
         
             - Foramlly recognised Parliamentary right to control Indian affairs. 
             
             - EIC ko bola to report their communication to British Gov. 
             
             - Governor of Bengal was now, Governor General. ---> TO be assisted by council of 4 members. 
             
             - Control over B and M--> For making war and peace. 
             
             - SC in Calcutta
             
         
      1781 me Amending Act aaya----> To clearly define the jurisdiction of Supreme Court. 
  
         
         
      1784 me Pitt's India Act aaya : 
         
             - Company ke admin, ko jyada direct gov control ke under laaya gaya tha. 
             
             - Ek BOC of 6 members was constituted--> Isme, Secy of State, Chancellor of Exchequer or 4 privy councillors the. 
             
             - Is board ke order, COD par binding the. 
             
             - Ab, COD ko apne postings karne ke liye, Crown ki permisison leni padt thi. 
             
             - Gov in India ko, Governor General + Council of 3 ke under kar diya. 
             
             - B and M ki presidencies ko, GG ke subordinate kar diya. 
             
             - GG ko khudko, CoD or BoC ke subordinate kar diya. 
             
           
           
      1786 me Amending act aaya, Jis se GG ko power di, to override his council in extraordinary situations + GG and Commander-in-chief ke offices ko combine kar diya
        
        	- Warren Hastings, pahla banda tha, jisne dono post occupy ki. 
        		
        		   
            
       1793 ka Charter Act : 
        
           - 20 saalo ke possessions extend ki. 
           
           - B and M ke Governors ko decisively GG ke control ke under le aaye. 
           
           - Regular Code of Regulation, frame kiya. 
           
           - Sab laws ko Indian languages me print kiya jana tha. 
           
           - Is se, India me -> Civil Law ka concept introduce hua--> Enacted by a secular Human Agency and Applied Universally.     
            
            
       1813 ka Charter : Important push towards, westernisation of India. 
       
          - Company ke charter ko 20 saalo ke liye, Extend kiya. 
          
          - Trade monopoly cheen li, except- China and Tea. 
          
          - Christian cucks ko allow kiya. 
          
       
       
       
       1833 ka Charter : 
       
        
           - Sab monopolies khatam ho gayi. 
           
           - BoC ka president became---> Minister for Indian Affairs. 
           
           - GG of Bengal becae---> Governor General of Indi---> Apni council ke saath milke, will control all the civil, military and revenue matters of India.  
           
           - GG ko empower kiya to legislate for the entire country. ---> Applicable to all people--> British and Indian. 
           
           - Council me ek Law member add kiya gaya----> For codification of Laws. 
           
           - Company's services were thrown open to the natives---> Lekin, covenanted services me nominate karne ka koi provision nahi tha. 
           
       
       
       
      1853 ka CHarter : 
      
          - Unspecified time. 
          
          - Seperation of Executive and Legislative functions of GG's Council by adding 3 new members for Legislative Purposes. 
          
          - Company ke appointment ke upar ke control of curtail kiya by introducing open competition for Indian Civil Services. 
          
      
      
      1858 ka India Act : 
      
          - Replaced BoC with Secy of State for India. 
          
          - Council of India of 15 members to advice him. ---> Isme se 7 ko CoD select karne wala tha. 
          
          - GG ban gaya, Viceroy----> Answerable only to Secy of State. 
          
      
      
      
      
      1769-70 me. Bengal me Famine aaya---> Bengal ki 1/3rd population mar gayi. 
      
      	 - Hastings ne iski wajah se, Naib Diwan Reza Khan par corruption ke charges laga, gaand par laat maar bahar kiya. 
      
      1772 me, Warren Hastings lekar aaya---> Farming System. 
      
        	- Revenue collection ke charge ke liye, European District Collectors appoint kiye. 
        	
        	- Lekin, Actual Revenue collection ka kaam, highest bidder ko diya jata tha. 
        	
        	- Periodicity ke bhi kai experiments kiye, lekin agri ki maa chud gayi.  
        	
        	- 1784 me cornwallis ko India me isiliye bheja tha ki wo jaake, Revenue admin ko streamline karega. 
        	
        	
        	
        Cornwallis ke Permanent Settlement : 
        
           - Fix the damn thing permanently. 		Is se pehle--> Alexander Dow, Henri Parullo, Philip Franceis and Thomas Law naam ke chodo ne bhi same cheez boli thi. 
           
           - Ye sab, Physiocratic School of thinking ke the : "Agri is the backbone of country's economy". 
           
           - Inhe lagta tha ki is se corrpution bhi kam ho jayega kyunki, assessment ke time, bhayanak hafta wasooli hua karti thi. 
           
           - Ladlords ko bhi incentive tha land me invest karne ka. 
           
	   - Company ko regular taxes mil jaane the. 
	   
	   - 1793 me, Zamindars ke sath, Permanent Settlement kiya gaya. 
	   
	   - BBO ki saari jameen, Became part of Zamindari or estate 
	   
	   - Zamindar ko ispar, tax dena padta tha, jo ki fix tha. 
	   
	   - Wo us zamindari ko sell, mortgage ya transfer kar sakta tha. 
	   
	   - Land could also be inherited.         
            
           - Failure to pay the revenue would lead to confiscation of zamindari by gov and it's sale by auction. 
           
           - Therefor : Creation of Private property in land. 
           
           - CHutiyo ne, Zamindars ko ownership rights de diye, jinke pass pehle bas, revenue collection rights the. 
           
           - Peasants ko saala Kirayedaar banakar chor diya. 
           
           - Zamindar or Peasant ke beech patta sign hona tha. 
           
           - 1799 se 1812 ke beech, naye regulations laake, zamindaars ko power de di gayi to seize property of tenants in case of non-payment of rent without any permission of a court of law. 
           
           - Zamindar ko bhi, 'Sun-set' law ke hisab se, ek fixed date par revenue deni padti thi, jiske fail hone par uske bhi lode lag jaate the. 
           
           - Lekin, auction me Zamindaro ke khudke offcials- Amlas,   ya   kabhi kabhi bade peasants- Jotedars,  hi khareed lete the. 
           
           - Kuch zamindar, sub-feudatory tenures yaani, Patni, employ kiya karte the.  
       
       
       
       
       
       
       
       
       1798 me Fuckboy ne, Madras presidency me bhi Permanent Settlement extend karne ka man banaya. 
       
       		- Lekin, Madras ki zamindar class itni badi nahi thi. 
       		
       		- Lekin, fir bhi 1801 se 1807 ke beech, kaafi areas me introduce kiya gaya. 
       		
       		- Local Poligars ko hi, zamindars recognise kiya gaya. 
       		
       		- Jaha Poligars nahi the, waha villages ko estates me aggregate karke, highest bidder ko bech diya, in auctions. 
       		
       		- Lekin  yaha ke scottish zamindars, jaise Munro and Elphinstone, ko bade zamindaro se nafrat thi. Unhe pata tha, ki kaise perma settlement se saara profit, bade zamindar hadap lete the. 
       		
       		- David Recardo ki "theory of rent" ne bhi kaafi influence kiya. 
       
       		- Isliye, Madras Presidency me, Ryotwari settlement jaise randaap kiya gaya. 
       	
       			1) Ise, Alexander Reed ne, 1792 me Baramahal naam ki jagah par start kiya tha. 
       			
       			2) Lekin, Munro ne ise, 1801 me copy kar liya. 
       
       			3) Zamindaro ki jagah, ye directly villages se paise wasoola karte the, har village ko fix amount pay karni hoti thi. 
       			
       			4) Is ke baad, wo har ryot yaani cultivator ko asses karte the. 		
       			
       			5) Munro bhai, ke hisab se, "State itself was the supreme landlord". 
       			
       			6) Assessmnet ke baad, annual agreements kiye jaate the, between government and cultivators---> Jinke paas choice hoti thi agreement ko accept ya reject karne ki.
       			
       			7) Lekin, bohot hi jyada revenue demand ki jaati thi. Isliye, koi jhaant deta tha, to koi bakri ki leed. 
       			
       			8) Isliye, 1807 me Munro bhai ke wapas jaate hi, is system ko abolish kar diya gaya. 
       			
       			9) Lekin, 1820 me, Munro bhai came back as Governor of Madras. 
       			
       		       10) Is se, land hui State ki, na ki zamindars ki--> Isliye, Brit Gov bhi khush thi---> Isliye Presidency ke most parts me introduce kiya gaya. 
       		       
       		       11) Ise, putcut settlement bhi kehte the. 
       
         	       12) 1855 ke baad se hi, Scientific survey of land and fresh assessment of revenue were undertaken-----> Is se tax burden kam hua. 
         	       
         	       13) Is system ko, Madras Presidency ke Norther Areas me bhi laya gaya, jaha chodo ko kuch zamindar type ke log mil gaye the. 
         	 
         - Bombay Presidency me, Ryotwari system start hua tha, Gujrat se, after it's annexation in 1803 and then in 1818 when Peshwa's territories were conquered. 
         
         	- Munro ke chele, Elphinstone
         	
         	- British log, Deshmukh, ya Patil naam ke village headman ke through revenue collect kar rahe the. 
         	
         	- Lekin, is se jyada rokda nahi aa raha tha. 
         	
         	- Isliye, 1813-14 se, unhone directly peasants se collect karna shuru kar diya. 
         	
         	- R.K. Pringle naam ke chode ne land survey kar, 55% of produce rent fix kar diya. 
         	
         	- Lekin, 1835 me ise Replace kar diya gaya, by 'Bombay Survey System', jise 2 officers G.Wingate and H.E.Goldsmid ne devise kiya tha. 
         	
         	- Is system se, 1847 tak, pure Deccan ko cover kar diya gaya. 
         	
         	- "Village Patil" ki maa chud gayi this is system se. 
       
       		- Is system ko fir, Sindh, Assam and Coorg me extend kiya gaya. 
       
        
            
        MAHALWARI SETTLEMENT : 
        
          - North and NW India , between 1801 ke 1806 Brits ke haath aa gaya---> Himalayan Foothills and Ganga-Jamuna Doab. 
          
          - Yaha bade 'Taluqdaars' hua karte the---> Ye, Intermediary zamindars hua karte the-->Ye states se contract karke, revenue collect kiya karte the.  
          
          - Lekin, yaha 'Primary Zamindars' bhi the, jo 'Holders of proprietary rights over agri lands' the.
          
          - Holt Mackenzie and Thomas Metcalf    
            
          - Regulation VII of 1822 se Mackenzie ke recommendatoin par 'Primary Zamindars' and village communities , ke saath, field-to-field survey kar, revenue settlement kiya gaya. 
          
          - Taluqtads puri tarah se eliminate nahi hue the, lekin jaha possible tha, joint propeietary rights were vested in village communities. 
          
          - Lekin, itna complex system tha, ki, Existing machinery ki madad se, survey tak dhang se nahi kiya ja saka. 
          
          - Regulation IX of 1833 se kuch reforms kiye gaye. --->  R.M Bird bhai ne "Mahal" naam ki fiscal unit ke detailed survey kiye--> Based on the net value of potential produce. Ise complete lekin, James Thomason ne kiya. 
          
          - 30 saal tak settlement ki thi---> State would appropriate 2/3rd of net income of land. 
          
          - Is system ko fir, Punjab and Central India me extend kiya gaya.   
            
            
            
            
                  
               
         1928 tak : 
         
            19% land Zamindari System ke under,       29% Mahalwari ke under     or    52% Ryotwari ke under tha.       
               
             
             
             
             
             
      1813 tak Company was like the Traditional Indian Ruler : 
      
        - Avoiding innovation or intervention, but keeping a vigilant eye on extracting agri surplus. 
        
        - Lekin ye sab change ho gaye because of : Industrial Revolution, Need for Raw materials, Integration of markets. 
        
      
      
             
      1772 me, warren Hastings ne charge liya : 
      
         - Sab districts me, 2 courts banwaye : 1 Civil court a.k.a Diwani Adalat   and    1 Criminal Court a.k.a Faujdari adalat. 
         
         - Criminal cases me mulla laws and Civil cases me, Hindu/Mulla laws apply hote the. 
         
         - Laws ko divide kiya gaya according to subjects. 
         
         - Civil Courts ko European District Collector preside karta tha. ---> Inhe assist karne ke liye, molvi or pandat hote the. 
         
         - Calcutta me ek appeal court thi----> Jise 'President' preside karta tha, or counicl ke 2 members bhi. 
         
         - Criminal court kazi/mufti ke under thi---> Lekin, inhe district collectors supervise karte the. 
         
         - Iski appeal court --> Sadar Nizamat Adalat thi---> Removed from Murshidabad to Calcutta. 
         
         - Iska control bhi, President or Council member ke paas aa gaya tha, Reza khan ko hatane ke baad. 
         
         - 1774 tak, sala Hastings, khud Criminal Justice system ko supervise karta tha. 
         
         - Lekin, CoD ke kehne par, Reza khan ko dobara, Nizamat Adalat ka head bana diya, or ise Wapas Murshidabad shift kar diya gaya. 
         
         
         
      1773 se 1781 ke beech,  Justice or Executive functions ko seperate karne ki kaafi koshish ki gayi : 
      
         -  Hastings or Impey (Chief justice of Calcutta High COurt) ----->  District collectors se unki Judicial powers cheen li gayi. 
         
         - Civil Justice ke liye : District courts ki jagah--> 6 provincial courts banaye gaye, fir inhe bhi baad me 18 Mofussil courts se replace kar diya gaya. ----> In sab ko European Covenanted officers preside karte the. 
         
         - 1773 act se bani supreme court, baar baar lode leti rehti thi, supreme council se. 
         
         - Isliye, Sadar Diwani Adalat banai gayi,to serve as an appeal court---> Impey khud iska superintendent ban gaya, 1780 me. 
         
         - 1781 ke code me--> Rules and regulations specify kiye gaye the---> To be followed in all civil courts and all judicial orders were to be made in writings. 
         
         - 1775 me, Hastings ke kehne par, 11 pandato ne, Hindu Laws ko compile kiya---> Ise, N.B Halhed ne, English me translate kiya. 
         
         - 1778 me mulla laws bhi complie hue. 
         
         - Is se, "Lawyers" type logo ki chaandi ho gayi. 
         
         - Hastings ke reforms ki wajah se, Judiciary centralise ho gayi. 
         
         
       1787 me Reversal : Collectors were given duty of adminstering civil justice
       
       1793 me aaya : Cornwallis Code :--> Seperated Revenue Collection from Adminstration of Civil justice
       
       			- Is se Hierarchy of courts bane, from Zilla a.k.a District courts to city courts to 4 provincial courts and    Sadar Diwani Adalat with Appellate jurisdiction. 
       			
       			- Criminal cases me bhi : Faujdari adalts ko abolish kar, Circuit courts se replace kar diya, or Jinhe European judges head karte the. 
       			
       						: Sadar Nizamat Adalat ko wapas, Calcutta le aaya gaya, or GG-in-Council ke directly under kar diya gaya. 
       						
       						: In courts ki jurisdiction me Europeans nahi aate the ---> Ye log bas Court at Calcutta ke under aate the. 
       						
       			- Matlab, Cornwallis code se, Indians ka total exclusion ho gaya
       			
       			- Code was extended to Banaras Province in 1795 
       			
       			
       			
       	Lekin, 1814 me, Munro bhai ke kehne par, CoD ne, Madras ke liye alag System banaya :  Provision for greater Indianisation of System at lower levels   +   Union of Magisterial, Revenue collection and judicial powers
       	
       																				  in the office of collector.
       																				  
       		- 1816 me fully introduce hua. 
       		
       		- 1819 me, Elphinstone bhai ke kehne par, Bombay me bhi extend kar diya gaya. 
       		
       
       
       
       	Bentinck bhai + 1833 ke Charter Act se kaafi changes aaye : 
       	
       	   - Threw open, Judicial positions to Indians
       	   
       	   - Provided law commission for codification of  laws. 																			  		      
                
             
        1859 me, Civil Procedure Code introduce hua. 
        
        1860 me, Indian Penal Code yani IPC introduce hua, jise 1833 wali commission ne banaya tha. 
        
        1862 me, Criminal Procedure Code Introduce hua.      
        
        
        
        
        
        
        POLICE : 
        
        
        	- Mughal time me, Police System was under the control of Faujdars, who were in charge of their 'Sarkars' a.k.a Rural Districes. 
        	
        		Towns ka charge, 'Kouoals' ke paas tha. 
        		
        		Zamindars, Village watchmen rakhte the, gaanvo ke liye. 
        		
        		
        		
         	- 1770 me jo famine aayi thi, uski wajah se, Crime rate badh gaya tha. 
         	
         	- 1781 tak, Faujdari system hi chalta raha, through minor modification. 
         	
         	- Baad me Faujdaro ko, English Magistrates se replace kar diya gaya. 
         	
         	- Zamindars ke paad ab bhi, police duties thi, lekin inhe, Magistrates ke subserviant kar diya gaya. 
         	
        
        
          1793 me Cornwallis the Coward ne : Took away the policing powers of Zamindars. 
          
          	- Divided the districts into Thanas or Units of police jurisdiction of 20/30 square miles---> Each placed under a new officer called-----> Daroga---> Ise,Magistrate appoint or Supervise karta tha.
          	
          	- Isliye, Daroga --> Naya instrument of control ban gaya, in Diwani provinces 
          	
          	- In saalo ne lekin, Zamindaro se nexus bana liye. 	
        
        
          Jonathan Duncan ne, Benaras me, Ise 'Tehsildari System' ke naam se implement kiya : Is bhai ne, Zamindaro ko bhi, Tehsildar ke under kar diya. 	
        
          1802 me, Daroga system was extended to Madras Province
        
        
        
        Lekin, 1807 me, Tehsildars were divested of police duties  
        
        	1812 me, Daroga System was formally abolished---> Supervision of Village police was vested in collector (Saala ab ye responsible tha--> Revenue, Police and Magisterial functions at same time)/ 
       
       		
        
        1843 me, Charles Napier ne ---> Sind me ek naya experiment kiya 
        
        	- Seperate Police Department banaya, with it's own officers 
        	
        	- Puri territory was under the supervision of an Inspector General 
        	
        	- Districts ke paas, khudka SP hoga---> Answerable to both Inspector General and District Collector
        	
        	- CHote level par Indians, lekin Officers to be Europeans. 
        	
        	- Is Model ko, 1849 me Punjab me,  1853 me Bombay me,   1859 me Madras me, lagu kiya gaya. 
        	
       
       
       	1860 me Police Commission appoint ki gayi : 
       	
       	  - Provided for a basic structure of Police Establishment for the Indian Empire----> Enacted by the Indian Police Act, 1861. 
       	  
       	  - Agle 100 saalo tak yahi system lagu raha. 
       	  
       	  - Military police ko eliminate kiya gaya. 
       	  
       	  - Civilian police was organised on a provincial basis with IGs anwserable to provincial govs and District superintendents to the collectos. 
       	  
       	  - Matlab, Entire police system was placed under the control of civilian authority
       	  
       	  - District Superintendent yani ki SP, was in charge of rural police . 
       	  
       	  - Daroga ban gaya
       	  
       	  - Lekin, Indians were completely excluded. 
       	  
       
      1902 ke Police commission --> Provided for appointment of educated Indians to the position of officers of police force. 
        
        
        
             
      ARMY : 
      
      
      		French Chodo ne, 1721 me, Indian Army recruit karne ki tradition start ki thi. 
      		
      		1748 me, Stinger Lawrence naam ke chode ne, Permanent Indian army recruit ki, English Company ke liye. 
      		
      		Clive ne, 1757 me ise renew kiya. 
      		
      		Sepoy Army ko British officer command karta tha.        
             
             	1856 me, iska number 2 lakh paar kar gaya tha. 
             
             
             
            1857 ke baad, Peel Commission banai gayi : To loo into the military affairs of India 
             
            Indian Officers ki training start hui in 1931, after the 1st RTC.  
             
             
             
             
             
          
          
            INDIAN CIVIL SERVICES : 
      
      
      		- Method of recruitment : Indian Act of 1784 and Charter Act of 1793 : Only through nomination by Members of CoD
      		
      		- 1798 me Fuckboy ne : Fort Williams college start kiya : Sab presidencies ke civil servants ki training hoti thi. 
      		
      		- 1802 me ise, close kar diya gaya. 
      		
      		- 1805 me, iski jagah, East India College banaya gaya at Hertford, jise 1809 me, Haileybury me shift kar diya gaya. 
      		
      		- CoD ke dwara nominated members ki yaha 2 saal tak training hoti thi.  	
          
          	- Charter Act of 1833 se competition start hua, for recruitment----> But it was limited to only those who were nominated by the directors
          	
          	- Finally, Charter Act of 1853 se, Open Competition start hua, even Indians ke liye bhi. 
	
		- Haileybury college ko, 1858 me abolish kar diya gaya. 
		
		- Civil Service Commission, har saal recruit karti thi, through an examination held in England. 
		          
          	- 1870 me, Statutory Civil Services start hui : "Kuch ache gharo ke Indians ko, Covenanted civil services ke liye, recruit kiya jayega". - Lord Lytton Lundwale
          	
          	- 1892 me Civil Services reforms hue : Covenanted civil Services ban gayi---> Indian Civil Services(ICS) ,   Uncovenanted ban gayi ---> Provincial Civil Services
          	
          		- Lord Lytton Lundwale ki Statutory Civil service ko abolish kar diya gaya---> Ye waali seats ab, promotion ke through bhari jani thi, from Provincial Civil services. 
          		
          	- Indians ko lekin, abhi bhi London jaake paper dena padta tha, isliye, 1922 tak, bas Services me 15% hi Indians the. 
          	
          	- GoI Act, 1919 se --> Seperate, not simultaneous, recruitment examinations hone lage, to the ICS. ----> 1st exam hua tha, Allahbad me, in Feb 1922. 
          	
          	- 1941 tak, Indians outnumbered Europeans in Indian Civil services. 
               
            	
            
            
                     
                 
                 
                 
    	PARAMOUNTCY
    	
    	
    	- 2/5th of Indian Territory, 'Indirect rule' ke under thi. 
    	
    	- Princes rule karte the, lekin, British Residents or Political agents govern karte the. 
    	
    	- Pehle commercial agents rakhe hue the, jinka kaam tha, EIC ke commercial interests ko protect karna
    	
    	- Lekin, baad me ye, Residents ban gaye, or Comapany or Indian princes ke beech ke political relations ko bhi manage kiya karte the. 
    	
    	- Mughals ke time, 'Vakils' ka system hua karta tha. ---> Ye client state ko represent karta tha, Mughal court me. 
    	
    	- Paramountcy ke under, Indian states ke paas, bas "domestic sovereginity" thi, or sovereignity beyond borders, Company ke paas thi, as the superior imperial power. 
    	
    	- Ye Indirect rule, 3 phases me evolve hua : 
    	
    			1st Phase : 1764 to 1797 ---> Jab, company ne apne residents rakhe, at the courts of Murshidabad, Awadh and Hyderabad, after the Battle of Buxar
    			
    			
    			2nd Phase : 1798 to 1840 ---> Fuckboy ke time, aggressive expanisionism ke time, and his policy of subordinate alliance. 
    			
    							Role change ho gaya : Form managing, diplomatic relations to Indirect control. 
    							
    							Sala kuch cases me to , Residents khud territorial expanision karne lage. 
    							
    							Ye khatm hua, jab 1st Afghan war me, lode lag gaye, during 1838-42. 
    							
    							
    							
    		 	3rd Phase : 1841 to 1857 ---> Expanision ki jagah, consolidation par jor ---> Is time, direct annexation bhi start hua, during Dalhousie's Forward Policies, example- Doctrine of lapse. 
    		 	
    		 	
    		 	
    		 	1857 ke revolt me, Jo areas indirect control me the, unhone participate nahi kiya, or saala madad ki, jaise Hyderabad and Gwalior---> Isliye, 1857 ke baad se, commitment kiya, 'to respect the rights' 
    		 	
    		 	            
                 
        	Mayo bhai ke aane se(1869-72), reforminst policies firse wapas aa gayi : 
        	
        		Ye princes par pressure daalne lage, to reform their regime. 
        		
        		Baroda ke Madav Rao ki gaand par laat padi, on the grounds of "Gross Misrule". 
        		
        		         
        1870s se jab Nationalism jor pakadne laga, tab, Lord Lytton Lundwale, ne bola ki, "Princes to 'natural leaders' hain, Indians ke'. 
        
        Ye, princes ki madad se 'Legitamcy' gain kar rahe the, isliye ye rituals wagarh kiya karte the : Ex : Delhi Durbar of January 1877,  Gun Salutes
        
        
        Lord Curzon Badelundwale (1898-1905) ke time to intervention kaafi badh gaya tha : 
        
        	- Grand coronation Durbar, of 1903 me bulaya sabko, lekin sabko strict contol me le liye. 
        	
        	- 1900 me sabki foreign travel par ban laga diya
        	
        	- 1902 me Nizam se nayi treaty sign ki, regardin admin of Berar
        	
        	- Imperial Service Troops ke liye, jyada paise wasoole
        	
        	- 63 states ko directly british admin ke under liya, on temp basis. 
        	
        
        Mayo ke time, thoda dheel deni shuru ki, jab political extremism apne charam par tha. 
        
        	- 1909 me, nayi policy of 'Laissez-faire' ki baat ki. 
        	
       
       
       
       
       
       
       Indian Emigration Act of 1859 : Preventing migrant workers from leaving the plantation sites : Ensured a steady supply of labour to plantations. 
       
                 
                                                   
       GD Birla and Swarupchand Hukumchand, ne 1922 me Pehli Desi Jute Mills kholi. 
       
       
       
       
       
       SOCIAL and RELIGIOUS Reforms 
       
       
       
        Warren Hastings : Policy of Orientalism ----> Respect for traditional Indian Culture. 
        
        	- Establishment of Asiatic Society of Bengal,   Calcutta Madrassa,   Sanskrit college at Banaras
        	
       
       	Hastings ke jaane ke baad se, Indians ke social institutions me lund adane ki policy start ho gayi. 
       	
       		- Evangelicalism,  Utilitarianism,   Free-Trade thinking,   Reformism
       		
       		- English Education se, Desi log tayyar ho gaye, reforms ki baaate karne ko : 
       		
       			- Charity run schools in Calcutta, Madras and Bombay 
       			
       			- Charles Grant advocated for English Education 
       
       			- Madras ke Dansih Station se, Protestant missionaries kaam karne lage, from early 18th CE. 
       			
       			- Lekin, 1813 tak, inka number kaafi kam tha. 
       			
       		- Real begining of Western Education started after the Charter Act of 1813----> Missionaries ko allow kiya  +  1 lakh rupees per year for 2 specific things :- i)Improving literature ii)Promote Sciences
       		
       			Lekin, kis language me padhana hai, aisa kuch mentioned nahi tha. 
       			
       			
       		- David Hare jaise Individuals, desh ke kai areas me school kholne lage---> Jaha English was the medium of instruction. 
       		
       		- 1819 me, Calcutta School Book society  and  Calcutta School society start hui.-----> Vernacular schools ko promote karne ke liye. 
       		
       		- Is time, RRR ne English Education ki wakalat karni shuru kardi. 
       		
       		- 1828 me, Bentncik GG bana, jo ek Utilitarian banda tha---> Iski wajah se Anglicists ki jeet hui, over Orientalists. 
       		
       		- Is bhai ne, Thomas Babington Macaulay ko Law member appoint kiya in his council in 1834. ----> Ise, fir General Committee on Public Instruction ka President bhi bana diya gaya. 
       		
       		- 2nd February, 1835 ko Macualay ne apna--> "Minute on Indian Education" issue kiya		
       
       
       
		- Lekin, NW India me, Thomason naam ke bande ne, Vernacular elementary schools start kiye, or ye itne mast the, ki Dalhousie ne, ise Bengal or Bihar me bhi extend karne ko recommend kiya. 
		
		-1854 me, Charles Wood's Education Dispatch aaya :---> Shift away from Downward Filtration Policy---> Recommended extansion of Vernacular education. 
		
		
		- 1857 me 3 nayi Universities bhi banai gayi at Calcutta, Bombay and Madras, on the model of Unviersity of London. 
		
		- English medium wale secondary schools bhi khub bane. 
		
		
		- 1882 me Indian Education Commission aaya : Tried to resolve the problem of duality in education system       
       
       
       		- 1882 tak, 20 crore population me se bas, 20 lakh hi elementary padhe likhe log the. 
       		
       		- 
       
       
       
       Young Bengal wale, Henry ne hi, 1838 me 'Society for the Acquisistion of General Knowledge' start ki---> Discussed various aspects of western science and spoke about social reforms
       
       
       
               SOCIAL REFORMS : 
               
               
               			- Fuckboy ne 1803 me, Child Sacrifice par ban laga diya, at Sagar Island, in the Bay of Bengal. 
               			
               			- 1870 me Female Infanticide par ban lagaya gaya. 
               			
               			- Bengal ke jin areas me, Dyabbaga school of personal Hindu law, applicable tha--> Waha Sati prevelant thi.    Iske opposite, Mitakshara school tha, jisme widow ko property rights mil jaate the. 
               			
               			- 1829 me Sati par ban laga. 
               			
               			- Hindu Widow's Remarriage act of 1856
               				- Lekin, saala is se, widow ko apne purani pati ki properites nahi milti thi. 
               				
               	
               	1866 me, Vishnushastri Pandit ne, Widow Remarriage ke liye ek society banai. 
               	
               	
                1878 me, Veerasalinam Pantulu ne, Society for Social Reform banai, Widows ki jawani bachane ke liye. 
                
                
                  
                1830s me. Thuggs ke against campaign start hui. ---> Campaign ka architect tha William Sleeman. 
               
               
               1843 me Slavery ko abolish kiya gaya.   Is se pehle, Charter Act of 1833 me, Slavery Abolish karne ki baat ki gayi thi. 
               
               
               
               
               
               
    Marxist Historians : R P Dutt,   V.I.Pavlov,   S.N.Mukherjee,    Sumit Sarkar,    Bipin Chandra           
                                                                                   
                                   
                                   
                                   
                                   
                   Neel Darpan --->  Dinabandhu Mitra, in 1860. --> Ek Bengalee play hai.                 
                                   
                                   
                   1873 me Pabna Agrarian League start hui thi. 
                   
                   
                   Punjab me, Kuka Revolt hua, 1872 me.                 
                                   
                                   
                                   
                                                        
                  Poona Sarvajanik Sabha ne, 1873 me ek Report publish ki----> "Case for revision of the revenue rates".                     
                                      
                             Jab rioting start hui, to Bombay Gov ne : Deccan Agri Relief Act of 1879 pass kiya.          
                                      
                                      
                                      
                   1907 me Punjab me Canal Colony Agitations hue, Jab Punjab Gov ne  koshish ki to control the inheritence of property. 
                   
                   	-- Isme, LLR and Ajit Singh of Lahore Indian Association, Singh Sabha and Arya Samaj bhi jud gaye. 
                   	
                   	-- Minto ne dabaw me aakar, Act ko veto kar diya.                   
                                      
                                      
                                      
                1899-1900 me Munda Ulgulan start hua---> Under the leadership of Birsa Munda. ---> Tribals vs Dikus
                
                
                
                
                
       	1864 me Forest Department start hua tha. 
       	
       	1865 me Government Forest Act pass hua tha. 
       	
       	1878 me Indian Forests Act pass hua tha----> Complete Govt monopoly on Indian Forest Lands. 
       	
       		- Divided the forests into 3 categories :- Reserved, Protected and Unclassified.          
                
                						- Reserved wale me to ghuste ki gaand par goli maarte the. 
                						
                						- Protected wale me, Traditional forest dwelling communities, could collect Timber, but only for personal use and not for sale. 
                						
        1900 tak, 20% of India's Land area had come under Forest Adminstration. 
        
        	- Hyderabad ke Chenchus ki maa chud gayi, or unhone Daakupana shuru kar diya. 
        	
        	- Basrar ke Bison Marias ne Fuck off bol diya GOv ko 
        	
        	- Baigas to saale, neighbouring areas me bhaag jaate the. 
        	
        	- Ganjam Agency ke Saora Tribals, bhi fuck off bolne lage. 
                
                
          Andhra Pradesh ke Koya and Konda Dora Tribals bhi rebellion me kud pade, between 1839 and 1862----> Initiated by local 'Muttadars' or Estate Holders, jinki power chin gayi thi, jab outsiders aa gaye area me. 
          
          
          1879 me Rampa Rebellion start ho gaya. 
          
          Pody a.k.a Shifting Cultivation par ban lag gaya tha.      
                
                
          1910 me, Bastar ke Marias and Murias ne, logo ke gale utarne shuru kar diye. 
          
          
          Bengal ke Jungle Mahal me, Santhal logo ne, Village markets lootne shuru kar diye. 
          
          
          
          Tehri Gharwal ke peasants , 'dhandak' naam ki old tradition follow karte the---> Protesting against injustice. 
          
          
          Kumaun me, 'Utar' naam ka forced labour ka system chala rahe the gore. 
          
          
          
          1840s me, Bhil log, apna customary 'giras' a.k.a dues wasoola karte the, in the plains of khandesh, of western India.       
                
                
                
          1879 me Vasudeo Phadke aise bhadke, ki sabke hosh ud gaye---> Poona.                             
                                      
                                      
                                      
                                       
                                      
                          1851 Calcutta me British Indian Association---> 1st Major voluntary organisation in India----> Represented primarily landlord interests. 
                          
                          1861 me jab Indian Council act pass hua, tab it started to play a prominent role---> Because the act provided for a limited Indian representation in the legislative councils.
                          
                          1892 ke act se, limited electoral system introduce hua, lekin tab tak, council me BIA ke bande hi bhare hue the. 
                          
                          
                          
                    BIA se pehle, ek Landholder's society thi, jisme Anglo-Indians, a.k.a Gore log the. Lekin, BIA pehli aisi body thi, jisme bas Indian log the. 
                    
                    
                    
                    1852 me Madras Native association and Bombay associations bani----> teeno presidency associations ne seperate petitions bheje london me. 
                    
                    
                    	Lekin, Lonodn ke logo ne inki demands se apni gaand ponch li, or GoI act, 1853 me inki ek bhi demand nahi include ki gayi.       
                                                          
          
                                       
                                     
                                     
                                     
                                     
                                     
           1875 tak, there were 400 Indian Owned newspapers, published in both English and Regional languages,with an estimated readership of 150,000.                           
                                     
                                                     
                                   
           1850 me lex Loci act pass hua. 
           
           
           1860 me Income Tax lagu hua. ---> ise 1865 me withdraw kar liya gaya.  BC, lekin, 1868 me firse laga diya gaya.                           
                     
    
   		1870s me munci reforms hue. 
   		
   		1876 me ICS ki age, 21 se ghataakar 19 kar di gayi. 
   		
   		
   		1878 me Lord Lytton Lundwale, ne Vernacular Press Act pass kar diya. 
   		
   		1878 me hi Lundwale ne Arms act pass kiya----> Introduced a licensing system throughout India for possessing firearms--> Lekin, Goro ko is se bahar rakha. 
   		
   		1880 me Liberal Party jeet gayi London me, or Lord Ripon Came to India as viceroy. 
   		
   			- Bhai ne, 1882 me Verna Act repeal kiya. 
   			
   			- Arms act ko modify kiya. 
   			
   			- 1882 ke resolution me, 'local self-governemnt' introduce karne ki baat ki. 
    
    			- 1884 me Ripon ne Illbert bill wale randaap ke aage haath jod liye. 
    			
    			
    			
    			
   		1876 me, Fuddu Bengalee ki leadership me, Indian Association bani, jaha ye, British Indian Association ke members ko maa bahan ki gaali deta tha. 
   		
   		 			
    		1876 me Dadabhai Naoroji and Naoroji Ferdunji, london se wapas aaye, or Bombay Presidency association me jaan daali. 
    
    			- Isme fir naye leaders aake jud gaye, jaise ki : MG Ranade,  P.M.Mehta,  K.T.Telang
    			
    	
    	
    	
    	Poona me, 1870 me, ek nayi organisation bani : Poona Sarvajanik Sabha
    	
    	 	- Inhone ek saal ke andar andar, 17 hazaar logo se, power of attorneys or 'muktiyamamahs' sign karwaya, jis se ise ek trure representative character mila. 
    	 	
    		- BGT or GKG dono, iske member the. 
    		
    		- Dono ne ek dusre ko khub maa bahan ki gaaliya di, over the Age of Consent bill, 1891. ---> Increase the age of women from 10 to 12. 
    
    		- 1895 me, Tilak ki jeet hui, or GKG ne khudki ek rival organisation bana daali, jise wo---> Deccan Sabha kehta tha. 
    		
    		
    		
    	1884 me Madras Mahajan Sabha bani. 
    	
    	
    	Punjab me, Lahore Indian association thi. 
    	
    	
    	UP me Allahbad People's Association thi. 
       		 
       		 
       		 
        
        
        1877 me Delhi Durbar me kuch dindu journalists ikathe hue, or unhone, NATIVE PRESS ASSOCIATION banai. 
        
        	- Inhone Fuddu Bengalee ko elect kiya as the 1st secy, jo Indian Association ka leader tha, or Bengalee ka editor bhi. 
        	
       
       	1883 me, Indian Association ne, Calcutta me ek National Conference ki thi. 
       	
       	1884 me, Theosophical Society ki meeting me, sabne baari baari, Annie ki panty sungh ke, ekta ka pradarshan kiya. 
        
        
        
        Indian National Congress 
        
        		- W.C bonenerji ki leadership ke under, Bombay me ek conference hui thi, in 1885. 
        		
        		- Ye conference lekin, Poona me honi thi, but waha par cholera aaya hua tha. 
        		
        		- 1888 me decide kiya ki, koi bhi aisa resolution pass nahi hoga jise Dindu-Mulla ko overwhelming majority object kare. 
        		
        		- 1889 me, Legislative Councils ke reform ki baat ki. 
        
        		- 1st Congress me, 38 Bombay ke the, 21 Lemurians the or bas 4 Bengalee the(Thank allah).
        
        
               
               
               
               
               
               
               
       Charles Aitchison ke under, jo Public Service Commission bana tha, usne recommend kiya--> Raising the maximum age but not simultaneous examination. 
       
       
       1892 me, House of Commons ne, William Gladstone ke initiative par, simultaneous exam conduct karne ka resolution pass kiya---> Lekin, Saala Secy of State to abhi bhi oppose kar raha tha. 
       
       	Par, Betichodo ne, Age badhane ki jagah or kam kar di.         
               
               
               
               
               
               
               Fowler Comission ne, Exchange rate fix kiya tha. 
               
               
               
               
      Nagri Pracharni Sabha bani thi, 1893 in Benaras, for promoting Hindi Language.          
               
               
               
               
               
     1905 me Partition of Bengal Announce hua. 
     
     	- 17th July, 1905 me, Caluctta ki ek meeting me Fuddu Bengalee ne, British Goods and Institutions ko boycott karne ki baat ki. 
     	
     	- 7th August ko Calcutta Townhall ki meeting me, Boycott resolution officially pass hua---> Marked the beginning of Swadeshi Movement. 
     	
     	- Aurobindo Ghosh jaise leaders, Religion ki taraf dekh rahe the to reach masses. 
     	
     	- 'Bhagavadgita' ek source of inspiration ban gaya. 
     	
     	- Samitis organise ki gayi.           
               
        - Lahore me Rashbehari Bose ne Armed revolt karne ki koshih ki, or Fail hone par Japan bhaag gaya. 
        
        - Bengal Me jatin Mukherjee ne, Germany se arms import karne ki koshih ki, lekin, Orissa ke Balasore me police encounter me shaheed ho gaye (RiP Bro)
        
      
      
      
      
      6th April, 1919 ko Gandhi ne, Hartal karne ki baat ki, against Rowlatt Act. 
      
      9th April, 1919 ko Gandhi ko arrest kar liya gaya. Iske baad, log chutiya ho gaye, or sab fu faa kar diya. 
      
     13th April, 1919 ko Jallianwalah Bagh kaand hua. 
      
      
      		Is Movement ko organise karne ke liye, Gandhi ne Satyagraha Sabha setup ki thi, Bombay me. --> Home Rule League ke log bhi madad kar rahe the. 
        
        
        
        
        
        
        	May 1920 me Treaty of Sevres sign hui.  Isi mahine, Hunter Commission ki report bhi publish hui. 
        	
        		June, me Central Khilafat Committe ki Allahbad Conference me, 4 stage non-cooperation movement start hua. 
        
        		
        		1920 September me, Congress ke Calcutta Session me, Non-Cooperation Programme approve hua. 
           
           		September 1921 me Prince of Wales India aaya, to Bombay me khoob gore or parsi pite. 
           		
        		4th February 1922 ko Chauri Chaura me gaanv vaalo ne 22 police wale jala daale. 
        
        		10th March ko Gandhi ko arrest kar liya gaya. 
        
        
        
        
        
        
        States me, 1920s ke baad se hi Praja Mandals ban ne lag gaye the. 
        
        	- Ye saare mandals affiliated the, All India State's People's Conference, se jo 1927 me bani thi or jiska HQ, Bombay me tha.  
        	
       
       1928 me, Congress ne resolution pass kiya, urging princes to introduce responsible government based on representative institutions. 
        
       Sir Harcourt Butler ke under, Indian States Committee form hui thi, in 1928.  
             
         
         
         11th March, 1932 ko Delhi Pact sign  hua, jise 1st April ko, Chamber of Princes ne endorse kiya, projecting federation as a constitutional demand of the princes of India. 
         
         
         
         
        Phule, ne 1873 me Satyashodhak Samjah start kiya.  
         
         
         
         
         
         All Indi Depressed Classes Association ka M.C.Rajah   or    All India Hindu Mahasabha ke president, B.S.Munjhe ke beech  'Rajah-Munjhe Pact' sign hua, joint electorates with reserved seats. 
         
         
         
         
                 Poona Pact ke baad, Gandhi ne, Harijan Sevak Sangh banaya, or Harijan Campaign start kiya. 
                 
                 
                 Lekin, COngress walo ko isme koi interest nahi tha. 
                 
                 
                 Congress ne, March 1935 me, All India Depressed Classes league banaya, With Jagjivan Ram as a nationalist leader from Bihar. 
                 
                 	1937 ke election me, Congress 151 me se 73 seats jeet gayi, jo Bhangi logo ke liye reserved thi. 
                 
                 
                AMbedkar ne 1936 me khudki, Independent Labour party banai----> Bombay me 15 reserved me se 7 seats jeet gaye. 
                
                	- 1942 me bhai, ko Viceroy ki council ka labour member bana diya gaya. 
                	
                	- 18 se 20 july, 1942 ko Nagpur me hui conference me, Bhai ne, ALl India Schedule Caste Federation start ki. 
                	
                	
                	- 1946 ke election me, sab ke sab chode, including Hindu Mahasabha, Communist party, Scheduled Caste Federation, sabko milake, bas 2 hi seat mili, 151 reserved seats me se. 
                	
                	
                	
                	
                	
                	
         BIZNESS 
         
         
         		1887 me, Bengal National Chamber of Commerce bani thi. 
         		
         		1907 me, Indian Merchant's Chamber bana in Bombay
         		
         		
         		1920 me, Gandhi ke influence se, All India Trade union congress bani thi. 
         		
         		Purshotamdas Thakurdar ne, Bombay me, Anti-Non-Cooperation Society start ki, jisme R.D. Tata ne bhi paisa lagaya tha. 
         		
         		       	 
                 	1929 me, Meerut Consipiracy Case me, Gov ne Commie kutto ki maa chod di, jis se Industrialists ka khada ho gaya. 
                 
                 
                 	1936 me Bombay Manifesto aaya, jisme, Bomaby ke biznessmen ne Nehru ko maa bahan ki gaaliya di or bola ki socialism ki batti banake...
                 	
                 	
                 	
                 
                 
          
          
          
          
          
          
          
          
          
          
          
          
          
          
          
          
          
          
                          
            
             
           
           
           
           
           
           
           
           
           
           
           
           
           
                                           
           
            
           
              
             
             
             
             
             
             
             
             
             
             
             
             
             
             
             
             
             
                    
              
              
              
              
              
              
              
              
              
                    
                   
                   
                   
                   
                   
                         
                    
                    
                      
                      
                      
                      
                      
                      
                      
                      
                      
                      
                      
                      
                      
                            
                     
                     
               
               
           
           
           
           
           
           
           
           
           
           
           
           
           
           
           
         
         
         
         
         
         
         
         
         
         
         
         
         
         
         
         
          
          
          
          
          
          
          
          
          
          
          
          
          
          
          
          
          
          
          
          
                     
                  
                  
                  
                  
                  
                  
                  
                  
                  
                  
                        
                        
                        
                        
                        
                        
                        
                        
                        
                        
                        
                        
                        
                               
                     
                     
                     
                     
                     
                     
                     
                     
                     
                     
                     
                     
                       
                
                
                
                
                
                
                
                
                
                
                
                
                
                
                
                      
                     
                     
                     
                     
                     
                     
                     
                     
                     
                     
                     
                     
                     
                     
                     
                     
                     
                      
           
           
           
           
           
           
           
           
           
           
           
           
           
           
           
           
           
           
      
      
      
      
      
      
      
      
      
      
      
      
      
       
       
       
       
       
       
       
       
       
       
       
       
       
       
       
       
       
       
     
     
     
     
     
     
     
     
     
     
     
     
     
     
        
        
        
        
        
        
        
        
        
        
        
        
        
        
              
              
              
              
              
              
              
              
              
              
              
              
              
              
              
              
         
         
         
         
         
         
         
         
         
         
         
         
         
         
         
         
         
          
         
         
         
         
         
         
         
         
         
         
         
         
             
             
             
             
             
             
             
             
             
             
             
             
                 
              
              
              
              
              
              
              
              
              
              
              
              
              
                                 
                 
                 
                 
                 
                 
                      
                  
                  
                  
                  
                  
                  
                  
                  
                  
                  
                  
                  
                  
                  
                  
                  
                 
                         
                       
                       
                       
                       
                       
                       
                       
                       
                       
                    
                    
               
               
               
               
               
               
               
               
               
               
               
               
               
               
               
               
               
               
               
               
               
               
               
               
               
               
               
               
                       
                    
                    
                    
                    
                    
                    
                    
                    
                    
                    
                    
                    
                    
                    
                     
                  
                  
                  
                  
                  
                  
                  
                  
                             
                             
                             
                             
                             
                             
                             
                             
                             
                             
                             
                             
                             
                             
                             
                             
                             
                             
                             
                             
                             
                             
                             
                     
                     
                     
                     
                     
                     
                     
                      
                              
                              
                              
                              
                              
                              
                              
                                 
       
       
       
       
           
           
           
           
           
           
           
           
           
           
           
           
           
           
           
           
           
           
           
           
           
           
            
           
                
            
            
            
            
            
            
            
            
            
            
            
            
            
            
                
            
             
            
            
            
            
            
            
            
            
            
            
            
            
            
            
            
            
            
            
            
            
                          
                          
                          
                    
                    
                    
                    
                    
                    
                    
                    
                    
                    
                    
                    
                    
                    
                                         
                                      
                                      
                                      
                                      
                                      
                                      
                                      
                                      
                                      
                                      
                                      
                                      
                         
                         
                         
                         
                         
                         
                         
                         
                         
                         
                         
                         
                         
                            
                            
                            
                            
                            
                            
                            
                            
                            
                            
                            
                            
                            
                            
                            
                            
        
        
        
        
        
        
        
          
             
             
             
             
             
             
             
             
             
             
             
             
             
             
             
             
             
             
             
                   
             
             
             
             
             
             
             
             
             
             
             
             
             
             
             
             
             
             
                                                           
                                                       
                                                       
                                                       
                                                       
                                                       
                                                       
                                                       
                                                       
                                                       
                                                       
                                                       
                                                       
                                                       
                                                       
                                                                 
                        
                        
                        
                        
                        
                        
                        
                        
                        
                        
                        
                        
                        
                        
                        
                     
                     
                     
                     
                     
                     
                     
                     
                     
                     
                        
                        
                        
                        
                        
                        
                        
                        
                        							Itna Neeche kis se Gaand marwane aaya hai, Chode ? 
                                                    
