



1773 wale act ke chutiyaap ko rectify karne ke liye aaya tha, 1781 ka Amending Act : 

      - Ise Act of settle ment bhi kehte the :
      
          1) Governor General or uski council, SC ki jurisdiction me nahi aayenge. 
          
          2) Company ke servants bhi apni official actions ke liye nahi aayenge
          
          3) BC, Revenue matters bhi nahi aayenge
          
          4) Lekin, SC ke pass ab, Calcutta ke sab logo ki jurisdiction hogi. 
          
          5) Or haan, Dindu logo ke liye, Dindu lawss    and   Mulla log e liye Mulla law. 
          
          6) Provincial courts ki saari appeals, Supreme court ke pass nahi balki, Governor-General-in-council ke pass jayengi. 
          
          7) GGIC ko power di to frame regulations for the Provincial courts and COuncils. 
          
          
          




   Pitt's India Act ne 2 kaam kiye the pehli baar : 
   
      - Company ki terrotries ko, pehli baar---> 'British Possessions in India' bola tha
      
      - British Gov ko , Supreme Control de diya tha, Company's affairs or Admin in India ka, by creating a seperate body called Board of control, to manage the political affairs. 
      
      
      
      
      
    Cornwallis 786
    
      - Coucil se bada hai hamara Cornwallis
      
      - Cornwallis hi hoga Commander in chief.
      
      
      
      
     Charter Act of 1793 : 
     
     
       1) Cornwallis ko jo overriding power di thi, actually wo abse sab GGse or Presidency Governors ke liiye hai. 
       
       2) GG ke pass, jyada powers or control hoga, Bombay or Madras ki subordinate presidencies ka. 
       
       3) Trade Monopoly 20 saal ke liye or extend kardi. 
       
       5) Commander in Chief, GG ki council ka member nahi hoga
       
       6) BOC walo ko Indian logo ki jeb kaatke paisa diya jayega
       
       
       
    Charter Act of 1813 :
    
       
        1) Trade Monopoly khatam ho gayi, except chai and china
        
        
        2) British Crown ki sovereignity ko assert kiya over EIC's territories in India. 
        
        
        3) Christian missionaries ko allow kiya 
        
        
        4) Western Education ke spread karne ko bola
        
        
        5) Local Governments ko authorise kiya, persons pe tax lagane ko. 
        
        
        
     Charter Act of 1833 : 
     
     
         1) GG of Bengal, Abse, GG of India hooga. ---> vested in him all civil and military powers. ----> Is act se pehli baar, Government of India bani, over all the territories of British India. 
         
         
         2) Bomaby or Madras ke GOvernors se uni, legislative powers cheen li . 
         
         3) Ab jo law ban ne the, unhe regulaitons nahi, acts kaha jane laga. 
         
         4) EIC ki commercial activities ko abolish kar diya gaya---> Abse ye bas ek Purely admin body ban gayi. 
         
         5) Indians ko bhi Civil services me allow karne ki baat ho rahi thi, lekin CoD walo ne lode ada diya. 
         
         
         
     Charter Act 1853 : 
     
        1) Indian Parliament me local representation
        
        2) Civil Service thrwon open to indians. 
        
        3) Company ki term specify nahi ki    
         
         
         
         
         
     GoI act, 1857 se 
     
        - Double Gov wala system khatam ho gaya--- CoD or BoC ko abolish kar diya gaya. 
        
        - Secy of State ka naya office. ---> Complete authority and control over Indian Admin.   Ye british Cabinet ka member tha
        
        - Ise assist karne ke liye ek, 15-member coucnil of India banai gayi. 
        
      
      
      
     Indian Council act ,1861 : 
     
        1) Viceroy ko bola ki, wo kuch Indians ko apni expanded council me non-official memebers ki tarah appoint kare. 
        
             1862 me Canning ne :  Raja of Benaras,   Maharaja of patiala    and   Sir Dinkar Rao ko nominate kiya
             
             
        2) Decentralisation ka process start kiya :  Bombay or madras kko unke legislative powers lota diye             
    
    
        3) Nayi legislative councils banai jayengi in : Benal, NWFP and Punjab
        
        4) Rules for more convinent transaction of business   +    Portfolio system ko recognise kar liya, Canning ke ---> Cabinet form of Gov ki start hua
        
        
        5) Ordinance powe
        
      
      
      GoI act 1909
      
        - Isme Seperate electorates bas Mullo ko nahi mile the. Inke alawa : 
        
             - Presidency Corporation 
             
             - Chambers of Commerce
             
             - Universities 
             
             - Zamindars
             
             
        - Budget ke upar resolutions pass karna
        
        - Supply questions puch le
        
        - Satyendra Sings-- Law mmember in Indain executive council 
        
        
        
        
        
        GoI Act, 1919
        
        
           1) Central or Provinces ki alag alag list
           
           2) Provinces ki list divided into 2 pars
           
           3) Pehli baar---> Bicamerlism and Direct election
           
                - Indian Legislative Council ---> Replaced by   Council of State (Upper House)    and   Lower House (Legislative Assembly)
                
                - Dono ke majority members ko direct elections se elect kiya jana tha
                
                
           4) Commander in chief ke alwa,  Viceroy ki Executive council ke 6 me se 3 members, Indian honge. 
           
           5) Seperate Electorates ko extend karke : 
            
                - Sikhs,  Christians  ,  Anglo-Indians   and   Europeans
                
                
           6) Limited Franchise, based on Property, Tax or education
           
           
           7) High Commissioner for India ka office banaya, or Secy of State for India ke kuch funcitons use transfer kar diye gaye
           
           8) Public Service Commission banayenge, jise finally 1926 me setup kiya gaya
           
           9) Provincial or Central Budget ko seperate kar diya gaya. 
           
           
           
           
       GOI 1935 :
       
          
           1) Seperate Electorates ko extend karke :
           
               - Scheduled Castes  ,    Women,     Labour(Workers) 
               
               
           2) Council of India ko abolish kar diya gaya----> Secy of State ko bas kuch advisors de diye gaye
           
           
           3) 10% population ko franchise de diya
           
           
           4) RBi
           
           
           5) Fenderal Public Service Commission +  Provincial Public Service Commissions  +  Joint 
           
           
           6) Federal COurt--> Jisen, 1937 me setup kiya gaya.                       
      
      
      

    Important Artcles : 
    
       
         
     31 C : Savings of law to give effects to certain directive principles
     
     
     32 : FRs ko enforce karne ke liye, writs. 
     
     
     38 :   Welfare wala social order promote karna hai
     
     
     
     40 : Organisation of village Panchayats
     
     
     44 : UCC
     
      
     45 : 6 saal se kam ke baccho ke liye, early childhood care
     
     
     46 : Sc, ST, Weaker sections ke educational or economic interests ko promote karna hai
     
     
     
     50 : Judiciary ko executive se separate karna hai
     
     
     
     51 : International Peace and security ko promote karna hai
     
     
     
    51A : Fundamental Duties
    
    
    
    72 : President ki pardoning powers
    
    
    
    74 : Counicl of ministers, president ko A and A karne ke liye
    
    
    
    78 : Duties of PM
    
    
   110 : Money Bill ki definition
   
   
   123 : Ordinance promulgate karne ki power
   
   
   143 : Supreme Court se consult karne ki power
   
   
   
   155 : Governor ko appoint karne 
   
   
   
   161 : Governor ki pardoning powers
   
   
   163 : Governor ko advice karne ke liye, CoM
   
   
   167 : Duties of CM
   
   
   169 : States me, Legislative councils abolish ya create karna
   
   
   
   200 : Governor ka bill ko assent karna
   
   
   
   213 : State Legislature ke recess ke time, State Gov ki ordincance power
   
   
   226 : High Courts ki writ powers
   
   
  239AA: Delhi ke respect me special provisiosns
  
  
  
   249 : National Interests me, Power of Parliament to legislate Wrt matters in State list
   
   
   262 : Inter State River disputes ko adjudicate karne
   
   
   263 : Inter-State COuncil
   
   
   265 : Tax impose nahi kar sakte, save by authority of law
   
   
   275 : Union ki taraf se kuch states ko grants
   
   
   
   280 : Finance COmmissions
   
   
   300 : Suits and Proceedings
   
   
  300A : Right to PRoperty
  
  
   312 : All India Services
 
 
   315 : Public Service commisions for Union and for States
   
   
  323-A : Admin. Tribunals
  
  
   324 : Superintendece, Direction  and control of elections to be vested in an Election Commission
   
   
   330 : Lok Sabha me, SC, STs ke liye, Seats ka reservation
   
   
   335 : SC, STs ka kuch services and posts ke liye, claims
   
   
   352 : National Emergencey
   
   
   356 : President's Rule
   
   
   360 : Financial Emergency
   
   
   365 : President's Rule
   
   
   368 : Amendment
   
   370 : J and K --> temporary provisions
   
   
   
   
   
      2nd Schedule me in 9 logo ki Emoluments, allowances or privileges mentioned hai : 
      
      
          1) President 
          
          
          2) Governor
          
          
          3) Lok Sabha ka speaker or Dy Speaker
          
          
          4) Rajya Sabha ka Chairman or Dy Chairman
          
          
          5) Legislative Assemblies ka Speaker or Dy Speaker
          
          
          6) Legislative Councils ka Chairman or Dy Chairman
          
          7) SC ke judges
          
          8) HC ke judges
          
          9) CAG
          
          
          
          [BC, paisa pehle aata hai,, Shapath-vapath baad me]
          
          
     3rd Schedule me in 9 Logo ke oaths and Affirmations likhi hain      
 
 
         1) Ministers
         
         
         2) Parliament ke elections wala candidate
         
         
         3) MP
         
         
         4) SC ke judge
         
         
         5) CAG
         
         
         6) State ke ministers
         
         
         7) State LEgislatures me election ke candidates
         
         
         8) State legislatures ke memebrs
         
         
         9) High COurt ke judges




      7th Schedule 
      
          - Union List me 1 subject badha hai---> 97 se 98 ho gaye
          
          - State List me 7 subjects kam hue ha-> 66 se 59 ho gaye
          
          - Concurrent me 5 subjects badhe hain-> 47 se 52 ho gaye   




     8th Schedule Languages : 
       
         - Shuru me 14 thi
         
         - 1967 me 21st Amdmt act se ---> Sindhi add ki gayi
         
         - 1992 me 71st Amdmt act se ---> K M N yani Konkani, Manipuri  and  Nepali add ki gayi
 
         - 2003 me 92nd Amdmt act se ---> BDSM add kiya gaya---> Bodo, DOngri, Santhali, maithili   
         
         - 2011 me 96th Amdmt act se ---> Oriya ka naam change kar Odiya kar diya gaya. 
         
         
         
    9th Schedule : Shuru me, Article 31-B ke under 13 saale the---> Ab sala 282 hain. 
    
        - State lEgislatures ke hain : Land reforms and abolition of Zamindari
        
        - Parliament ke hain : Baaki matters ke liye
        
        - 1951 me 1st Amdmt se is schedule ko add kiya tha. 
        
        - 2007 me SC ne bola tha, ki BC chahe isme daal bhi to bhi, 1973 ke baad se jo bhi dala hai, uspar Judicial review karnege hum. 
        
        
        
    10th Schedule : 1985 me, Rajiv Gandhi ke time,    Parliament or State legislatures me defection se DQ karne ke liye add kiya gaya. 
    
    
    11th Schedule : 243-G ke under, Panchayats ko jo responsibilities di gayi hain, wo sab. ---> Isme 29 matters hain. 
    
        - Ise, 1992 me 73rd Amdmt act se add kiya tha. 
        
        
    12th Schedule :  243-W ke Under Muncis ke powers, auth and respo----> Isme 18 matters hain. 
    
         - Ise, 1992 me 74th Amdmt act se add kiya tha             




       Article 14 ke Exceptions : 
       
             
             
               1) Article 361 ke under, President or Governor ko ye sab immunities milti hain
               
                   i) Ye kisi court ko answerable nahi hote
                   
                  ii) Inke against koi criminal proceeding nahi start ho sakti 
                  
                 iii) Koi arrest ya improson karne nahi aayega
                 
                  iv) Koi civil proceeding nahi start ho sakti, term ke time
                  
                       - 2 mahine ka notice dene ke pehle
                       
                       
               2) Substantially true report of proceedings of House of Parliament or State legislature
               
               
               3) Parliament me jo bhi vote diya hai, ya committe me, uske liye, koi MP liable nahi ho sakta
               
               
               4) Kuch bola hai uske liye bhi same cheez
               
               
               5) Article 31-C : --> article 39 b,c > Article 14
               
               
               6) ambassador, diplomats wagarh ko immunity hoti hai
               
               
               7) UNo or uski agenices ko immunity hoti hai. 
               
               
             
         Article 15 ki pehli provision se State wale discriminate nahi kar sakte, or dusri provision, dono state or Pvt individuals ke discrimintation se bachati hai.       
                       
 

         Article 18 ke hisab se : 
         
             - State kisi ko title nahi de sakti (Military ya academic ke alawa)
             
             - Citizen, kisi foriegn state se title nahi le sakta
             
             
             - Office of Profit wala banda, koi foreigner, kisi or state se title nahi le sakta
                (President ki consent ke bina)
             - 

COURT-KACHEHRI
    
    Berubari Union(1960)- Preamble is not a part of Constitution.
    Kesvanand Bharti(1973)- Preamble is a part of constitution and it can be amended as long as the Basic Structure remains same.
    LIC of Inda(1995)- Same
    
    Gopalan(1950)--> Article 21-- Procedure established by law
    Menaka(1978)--> Article 21--Due process of law
    
    IR coelho(2007)--> 9th Schedule laws cannot have a blanket immunity from Judicial review. 
    
    Cooper(1970)--> President's Intention to promulgate an Ordinace can questioned in a court on ground of malafide.
    D.C Wadhwa(1987)--> Successive promulgations of Ordinance can not substitute the ordinary law makinf power of the legislature.
    
    Shankri Prasad(1951)--Parliament can ammend FRs using Article 368. (Consti Amendment is not a 'law' under article 13)
    Champakam Dorairajan(1951)-- FRs > DPSPs
    Golaknath(1967)--FRs cannot be amended for implementation of DPSPs.(Consti Amendment is a 'law' under article 13)
    
    Kesavanand Bharti(1973)-- The second provision of 25th Amdmt act is unconstitutional, which prevented judicial review of laws passed to implement Article 39b and c. 
    Parliament allowed to take away FRs as long as it does not change the 'Basic Structure'. 
    Minerva Mills case(1980)-- 42nd Consti act which put DPSPs above FRs is uncontitutional. But Article 14 and 19 are subordinate to DPSP Article 39b and C.
                                  (There should be balance between FRs and DPSPs).
     
        
    Indra Sawhney a.k.a Mandal(1992)-- Rule of Law is Basic Structure of constitution
    Kihoto Holohan a.k.a Defection(1993)-- Free and Fair elections; Soverign,democratic and republican nature in a Basic Structure. 
    
    
    Bommai(1994)-->Imposition of President's Rule in States. Subject to Judicial Review.  Court can restore dissolved/Suspended legislative assembly and Government.




Referrendum---Proposed legislation is voted on by Public.
Initiative----People propose a bill to the legislature.
Recall--------Nikal Laude, pehli fursat me nikal.
Plebiscite----To know the opinion of public on any issue.



Territories as per Article 1--> States+UT+Akhand Bharat(Future)
Union of India--> Only States

Article 2--> Admission/Inclusion into union Already existing states(Ex-Sikkim,Goa); 
 Article 3---> Changes in existing states(Internal readjustment,Ex- No.1 Haryana);
  Article 4 says, Do it with just a simple majority, and it's not a consti. amendment.


Linguistic states commissions:-
a) SK Dhar(1948)--> Reorganise states on basis of administrative convinience rather than linguistic basis. People=Angry, so 
b) JVP(1948 itself)-->Same shit.
(Potti died in 1953(RiP), So Andhra was created)
c) Fazl Ali,Panikar and Kunzuru--> Linguistic States(O.K); One language-One state( Not O.K); Abolish 4-fold classification of states; Create 16 states and 3 UTs.
(Govt. enacted States Reorganisation Act, 1956-- 14 states+6 UTs; 
          i) Kerala--Travancor + Malabar + Cochin + Dakshin Kannada
          ii)Andhra Pradesh-- Andhra + Telugu areas of Hyderabad
          iii)Madhya Pradesh-- Madhya Bharat + Vindhya Pradesh + Bhopal
          iv) Bombay--Saurashtra + Kutch
          v)Mysore-- + Coorg 
          vi) Punjab-- + PEPSU
          vii) Rajasthan-- + Ajmer

New States:-
          i) Bombay divided into-- Maharashtra and Gujrat(15th)                 (1960)
          ii)Dadar and Nagar haveli-- UT by 10th consti. Amdmt                  (1961)
          iii)Goa, Daman and Diu-- UT in 1962;Goa seperated and got Statehood   (1987)
          iv)Puducherry--Karaikal + Mahe given in 1954 by French,became UTs     (1962)
          v)Nagaland(16th State), out of Assam                                  (1963)
          vi)Haryana(17th State) + Chandigarh(UT) from Punjab                   (1966)
          vii)Hill areas of Punjab merged with Himachal in, became 18th state in(1971)
          viii) UT of Manipur, Tripura and Sub-State Meghalaya became 19th,20th and 21st states in 1972 + UTs of Mizoram and Arunachal Pradesh.
          ix)Sikkim- Merged in 1974, 22nd state in                              (1975)
          x)Mizoram(23rd), Arunachal(24th) and Goa(25th)                        (1987)
          xi)Chattisgarh(26th), Uttrakhand(27th), Jharkhand(28th)               (2000)
          xii)Telangana(29th)                                                   (2014)
          xiii)J and K-- Divided into 2 UTs- i)J and K ii) Ladakh               (2019)



Rights available  only to Citizens--> 15,16,19,29,30. 



Part III of Constitution--Magna Carta of India. FRs-- To promote the Idea of Political Democracy.
 Fundamental because-- Protected by Constitution + Fundamnetal for my all round development.
FRs can be suspended on grounds of National Emergency( Except 20 and 21) + Article 19 can be only suspended on Grounds of war and External Aggression( Not on Armed rebellion ). 
Limitations:- i) Article 31A- Acquisations of Estates etc(Protects from 14 and 19 only);     Article 31B- 9th Schedule(Protects from all FRs);         Article 31C- DPSP's enforcement.
(On FRs)      ii)Article 33- Armed Forces, Police, RAW etc                                   [State laws- Zamindari and Parliamentary laws-other matters]
              iii)Article 34- Martial Law. The term 'Martial law' has not been defined. 


Article 14- Equality before law(British,-ve)  and   Equal Protection of law(American,+ve)      to every person( Legal, Foreigner as well)
             i) No special prvilege             i)Equal Treatment in equal circumstances(Liabilities + Priviliges)
             ii)Equal subjugation to law        ii)Similar Application- Similar Situated 
             iii) No one is > law               iii)Like should be treated alike
Exceptions--i) Governors and President have some immunities( Arrests + Proceedings) under Article 361 
ii) True report of Legislature iii) Legislatures can say or vote on anything iv) Article 31C--Article 39 b,c > Article 14. 



Article 15- i)State cannot discriminate on basis of Race, Religion, Caste, Sex, or POB----> Protects from discrimination by State only
            ii) No citizen can be discriminated on these grounds w.r.t a) Access to shops, hotels etc b)Anything for public use-----> From Citizens + States both.
Exceptions--a)Special provisions for women and children allowed b) For SEBC+STs+SCs c)OBC reservation d) Economically weaker folks. 


Aricle 16- Equality in Public Employment. 
Exceptions-- a)Parliament can prescribe residence as a condtion b) Reservations for BCs c)Religious denominations d) Economically  weaker folks.


Article 17- No Untouchablity , Protection of Civil Rights Act,1955. But 'Untouchability' not defined so far. 

Article 18- NO Titles

Article 19- Freedom of i) Speech ii) Assembly iii) Association iv)Movement inside country only( Outside- 21) v) Residence vi) Profession . 
                   (Originally- vii) Property--Removed in 1978,now mentioned in Article 300A).
           
                   - Available only against state. Only to Citizens and not to legal institutions. 

               - Right to Property ko 1978 me, 44th Amendment act se hataya tha, Indira Gandhi ke time/ya morarji desai ke time, sure nahi hu. 


             Freedom of Speech me ye sab aata hai : 
             
                1) Khudke views propogate karna
                
                2) Press freedom
                
                3) Commercial Ads
                
                4) Phone tap na hone dena
                
                5) Telecast karne ka right
                
                6) Bundh ke against
                
                7) Freedom of Silence
                
                8) Pre-censorship ke khilaf
                
                9) Right to strike nahi hai, lekin demonstrate or picketing hai
                
           In par restriction laga sakti hai sarkaar on the grounds of : Sovereignity and Integrity of Inda      Security of State     Foreign State ke saath friendly relation ke liye      Decency/Morality   Contempt of Court  
           
                                                       		         Defemation        Incitement of OFfence


 
 
                 Freedom of Assembly par 2 restrictions laga sakti hai sarkaar : 
                 
                    1) Sovereignity and Integrity ko protect karna
                    
                    2) Public Order---> Traffic wagarah
 
 
 
 
Article 20- Against Arbitrary and excessive punishment for offence--- 

      - Sabke liye hai :    Indian,    Alien,    Company/Corporations

               


i) No Ex-post-facto law (Only criminal laws, and not under Preventive Detention)

        - Jo law hai bas usi ke liye,    Us time jo penalty presrcibe ki hai, bas wahi

        - Civil laws, ko retrospectively apply kar sakte hain
        
        - Bas conviction mana hai, trial kar sakte hain. 

 ii) No Double jeopardy(Only before courts/Judicial tribunals and Not before administrative or departmental proceedings)
   
         - Same bande, ko 2 baar saja nahi ho sakti, same kaam ke liye
         
         
          
  iii) No self-Incrimination(Both oral and documentary evidence + Only in criminal proceedings).


            - Compulsory production of material objects ke liye extend nahi hoti. 
            
            - Jabardasti, thumb impression, blood speciemen wagarh le sakte hain
            
            - compulsory exhibit karwa sakte hain bande ki body ko.
            
            - Ye bhi civil proceeding me apply nahi hoti. 




Article 21- Protection of Life and Personal liberty except according to 'Procedure established by law'.
            Gopalan Case(1950)- Only against arbitrary executive actions because of 'PEBL' and Personal liberty= Of person/individual only. 
            Menaka Case(1978)- Due process of law baby. Executive+Legislative actions both. Law should be reasonable,fair and just. 
    
              - Matlab, RIght to life and personal liberty ko tum cheen to sakte ho, lekin aisa karne ke liye law me jo procedure prescribed hoga, wo reasonable, just and fair hona chahiye. 
    
    Following rights under 21--
     Human Dignity; Environment; Livelihood; Privacy; Shelter; Health; Free Education(14 years); Free legal aid; Against solitary confinement; 
          Speedy trials; Against handcuffing; Inhuman treatment; Delayed execution; Travel Abroad; Against bonded labour;
            Custodial Harassment; Emergency medical aid; Driven out of state; Information; Reputation; Sleep; Opportunity; Sustainaible development.
              Hilly areas me sadke; Pension, Sleep, Noise pollution
              
              
              
Articel 21A- Free and Compulsory education(6-14 years)-
             Added by 86th Amendment act,2002( Before as DPSP in Article 45, which is now for Early childhood care till age of 6)+ F.Duty to educated kids. 





Article 22- Arrest and Detention. 
            Part I- Ordinary detention--
     i)Informend of grounds ii)Legal Defence 
   iii)Before megistrate in <24 hours and released after 24 hours unless megistrate authorise further detention.
       Not available to enemy aliens + Only for acts of Criminal/Quasi-Crminial in nature or some activity prejudicial to pub interest. 

            - Article 22 ke under, jo Ordinary laws ke case me protection milti hai, wo Enemy Aliens ko, Preventive Detention wale chodo ko nahi milti . 
  
            - Income tax ke na dene par arrest hona, Court ke order par arrest hona, ya civil arrest hona---> In sabko bhi Article 22 cover nahi karta hai. 
            
            
            
           Part II- Preventive Detention--i)<3 months unless Advisory boards(HC judes) says so ii)Informend of grounds iii) Legal defence.  ( Available to both aliens and citizens)
     Allows parliament to prescribe a)Grounds for >3 month detention b) Max period for detention c)Procedure followed by enquire board. 
     Parliament have exclusive authority to make PD laws for - Defence, Foreign affairs and Security of India.
     Both Parliament and State legislature can make PD laws for- Security of State, Maintenance of supplies, Essential services.  



            - 44th Amdmt act se---> 3 se 2 mahine kar diya hai (Bina advisory board ke opinion jane, kisi ko jail me fek dena , under PD law)
            
            - Lekin, Ye abhi tak force me nahi aay hai, to saala 3 mahine hi hai. 
            
            - Duniya ke kisi Democratic country ke consti me PD laws nahi hain. 



Article 23- No Human Traffic and Forced labour. Agaisnt both state and individuals. Include working for less than minimum wage. 
Exception- State can impose compulsory service but without discrimination.   

    - Isme, wo Gender ke alawa kisi cheez pe discriminate nahi kar sakti lekin. 


        Traffic bole to : 
        
            - Khareedna bechan
            
            - Randaap
            
            - Davdasi
            
            - Slavery
            
            
        Begar bole to :
         
              - Bina remuneration ke kaam karwana
              
              - Bandhua majdoori
              
              - Isme, Minimum wage ke neeche kaam karwana bhi aata hai. 
              
             

 

Article 24- No child Labour in Factories, Mines etc. 


       -14 saal ke kam ke baalako ke liye---> Construction work, railway etc
       
       - Harmless ya innocent work karwa lo. 
       
       - 1996 me SC ne banwaya tha : Child Labour Rehab Welfare Fund ---> Offending employer, 20K ka fine deposit karta hai. 
       
       - Commission for Protection of Child Rights Act, 2005 ---> National COmmission- --> Speedy trials for offences
       
       - 2006 me, Dhaaba, Dukan wagarah par kaam karne ko bhi ban kar diay. 
       
      
 
 

Article 25- All persons have Freedom of Conscience and to Profess, Practice and Propagate religion.  Covers religious beliefs and doctrines.----->Individual rights.


            - Lekin dusre ko convert nahi kar sakte. 
            
            - Citizens + ALiens dono ko
            
            - State regulate kar sakti hai, Religious practice ke saath juda koi eco, political type randaap. 
            
            - Hindu Religious instis ko all classes and sections of Hindus ke liye khol diya gaya hai. 
            
            - Sikh log kirpan carry kar sakte hain. 
            
            - Hindu Bole to Sikh, Jain, Buddhists. 



Article 26- Every religious denomination has right to--
i)Establish Institutions ii)Manage it's own affairs iii)Acquire property iv)Administer such property----->Religious denomination rights(Collective freedom of religion).

    



           Article 25 Individual Freedom ko protect karta hai. 
           
           Article 26 collective freedom ko protect karta hai. 


Article 27- No taxes for propagation of 1 specific religion. Only taxes not allowed, state can collect fee.



   
    

Article 28- No religious education in institutions wholly maintained by state fund. All other instis can teach whateverthefuck they want.







Article 29- i)Any section of citizen with distinct Language, script or culture have right to conserve it 
   ii)Institutes maintained by state funds or receiving aid from state cannot deny admission to anyone on the basis of religion , Race, caste or language. [Sex ke respect me kar sakte hain]
     
        
          Pehli Provision ---> Group ke right ko protect karti hai
          
          Dusre Provision ---> Individual ke right ko protect karti hai
     
      Protects both groups and Individual, and Both Religious and Linguistic minorities. 





Article 30- Linguistic or Religious minorities can setup educational institutions.  Only available to 'Minorities'. However 'Minority' is not defined. 

Article 31- Error 404, RTP is no longer a FR, but a Constitutional or legal right. It is not a part of Basic Structure.

Article 32- 'Heart and Soul of Constitution'. i)Right to move to SC for enforecment of FRs 
ii) SC can issue writs iii)Parliament can empower any other court to issue writs(Except HCs cause they already have writ power under Article 226) 
iv) President can susspend the right to move to court for enforcement of FRs durinf Emergency under Article 359.

           i)Habeus Corpus- For illegal detention. Can be issued against both Public authority and private individual. 
          ii)Mandamus- Issued to a Pubic official, body, corporation,Inderior court or tribunal to perform their duties which they had failed to perform.
                       Cannot be issued againt- i) Private Individual ii)Discretionary duty iii)Enforce contract iv)Against president or Governor v)Agaisnt Chief justice of HC
         iii)Prohibition- Higher court to lower court/Tribunal to stop them from exceeding their jurisdiction. Only against Judicial and Quasi-Judicial authority. 
          iv)Certiorari-  Against lower court/Tribunal to transfer a case or Quash the order in a case. 
                          Only against Judicial, Quasi-Judicial and Administrative authorities.( Not against Legislative bodies or private bodies).
           v)Quo-Warranto- Illegal usurption of public office of permanent nature created by a law or constitution. Only writ which can be sought by anyone and not just the agrieved person.

Article 33- NO FR for Armed Service etc.

Article 34- Martial Law

Article 35- a)Only Parliament can make laws on following:- i)Residence as a condition ii)Allowing courts other than SC to issue writs 
                                                         iii)Restricting FRs of Armed Forces iv)Martial law incidents
            b)Only Parliamnt can punish for- i) Untouchablitly ii)Human Traffic



			Article 31 A : Article 14 or 19 ke naam pe in 5 categories ke laws ko challenge nahi kar sakte : 
			
			     	 	1) Estate ke acquisition 
			     	 	
			     	 	2) Property ke mgmt ko takeover kar lena
			     	 	
			     	 	3) Coroprations ko amalgamate kar dena
			     	 	
			     	 	4) Corporation ke directors/shareholders ke rights ko extinguish ya modify kar dena
			     	 	
			     	 	5) Mining lease ko modify ya extinguish karna
			     	 	
		     - Lekin, ye State Law ko Judicial Review se tab tak immunise nahi karta jab tak use, Predisent ki cosideration ke liye reserve na kiya gaya ho, or president ne use assent na de di ho. 
		     
		     - Statutory limit ke under agar bande ke pass land hai, to use compensation dena jaruri hai. 
			               






Rights outside Part III--> Constitutional or Legal Rights--->i)No tax without authority of law(Article 265) ii)Article 300A 
                                                           iii)Trade,commerce and Intercourse throughout territory of India should be free(Article 301).







PART IV of COnstitution--DPSPs--> Borrowed from Irish Constitution. "Novel Features"-B.R.A .    "conscience of the constitution". 

DPSPs+FRs = Philosophy of Constitution. like "Instrument of Instructions" issued to GG by GOI act,1935. 

They are non-justiciable but Helps the courts in determining the constitutional validity of a law w.r.t Article 14 and 19. Article 37--> They are fundamental in governance of Country.

      [SOCIALIST]                                                         [GANDHI]                                                         [LIBERAL]
Article 38- S,E,P-Justice + Minimise Inequality               Article 40- Village Panchayats                                  Article 44- UCC 
Article 39- Means of livelihood,                              Article 43- Cottage Industries                                  Article 45- Early Childhood care
            Equitable distribution of Resources               Article 43B-Cooperative Societies                               Article 48- Animal Husbandry
            No concentration of wealth etc                    Article 46- SC/ST                                               Article 48A-Envt/Forest/Wildlife
Article 39A-Free legal aid+Equal Justice                      Article 47- "4/20 is a Sucks"                                   Article 49- Historical monuments
Article 41- Right to Work,help old age, sick etc              Article 48- Go-Hatya, Maha-Paap                                 Article 50- Seperate judiciary from Executive
Article 42- Work condtion+Maternity leave                                                                                     Articel 51- International Peace
Article 43- Living wage+ std. of life
Article 43A-Workers in MgMt
Article 47- Level of Nutrition+Public health


New DPSPs a)42nd Amdmt(1976) --i)Healthy dvpt of child(Article 39) ii)Equal Justice and free legal aid(Article 39A) iii) Workers in Mgmt(Article 43A) iv)Environment(Article 48A)
          b)44th Amdmt(1978)---i)Minimise Inequality in income,status and opportunity(Article 38)
          c)86th Amdmt(2002)---i)Changed Article 45 subject to Early childhood care
          d)97th Amdmt(2011)---i)Cooperative Socities

DPSPs outside Part IV--> i) Claims of SC/STs to service(Article 335) ii)Instruction in Mother Tongue(Article 350 A) iii) Development of Hindi Language(Article 351).




PART IV-A--FUNDAMENTAL DUTIES--> On Advice of Swaran Singh committee, Added in 1976 by 42nd Amdmt Act + 1 more in 2002. Inspired by USSR. In Article 51A--10 FDs.
           i)Abide by Constitution, respect flag and anthem
           ii)Cherish Noble Ideas of Freedom Struggle
           iii)Protect Sovereignity, I and U of India
           iv)Defend country when asked
           v)Harmony and spirit of brotherhood+ Dignity of Women
	   vi)Preserve country's heritage 
           vii)Environment + Living Creatures
           viii)Scientific Temper
           ix)Safeguard public property
           x)Excellence in all sphere of life
           xi)Teach your kids


AMENDMENT OF CONSTITUTION:-  Article 368 in part XX.  State legislatures cannot propose amdmts(Unlike USA), except for Legislatice councils.
          i)Such bill can be introduced by a pvt member or a ministe(Does not require prior approval of president).
          ii)Special Majority in each house( 2/3rd of members PandV + Majority of total membership of house)
          iii)No joint session
          iv)If bill amends Federal provision--> Assent of 50% of States required.(By simple majority---Majority of members PandV) (In USA- 75% of states)
          v)President must give assent to bill. 
          
          
          
          
Some provisions can be amended by simple majority(It does not fall under Article 368)---->
i)New States
 ii)Legislative Councils
  iii)2nd,5th and 6th Schedule 
  iv)Quoram in Parliament
   v)Salaries of MPs 
   vi)Rules of Procedure in Parliament 
   vii) Parliamentary priviliges
   viii)Use of English language or official language 
 ix)More jurisdiction to SC 
 ix)Citizenship 
x)Elections to Parliament and state legislatures 
xi)Delimitation of constituencies xii)UTs 




SOme provisions which require assents of States---->
i)Election of President --> Kyunki state ke elected officials involved hote hain. 

ii)Distribution Executive and Legislative powers of Centre and States

iii)SC/HCs --> Kyunki, ye state govs ki bhi gaand marte hain

iv)GST council --> Isme bhi states hote hain

v)7th schedule list ---> Ye to BC hai hi pura Centre State wala chutiyaap

vi)Representation of states in parliament 

vii)Article 368 itlself.




BASIC STRUCTURE OF CONSTITUTION:- 
     
     
     i)Supremacy of Constitution 
     
     ii) Soverign,Democratic,Secular and Republic nature 
     
     iii)Seperation of Power 
     
     iv)Federal Character
     
     v)U and I of India 
     
     vi)Welfare State 
     
     vii)Judicial review(Minerva Mills) 
    
     viii)Freedom and Dignity of individual ix)Parliamentary system 
     
     x)Rule of Law
     
     xi) Balance b/w DPSPs and FRs 
     
     xii)Equality xiii)Free and Fair election xiv)Independent Judiciary 
     
     xv)Limited amending power 
     
     xvi)Justice 
     
     xvii)Priciples of FRs 
     
     xviii) Power of SC under Article 32,136,141,142 
     
     xix)Power of HC under Article 226 and 227.


CENTRE STATE RELATIOSN:-
     
     
      The laws of parliament are not applicable in following areas:-
           i)President- make regulations for governance of 5 UTs- i)Ladhakh ii)Lakshadweep iii)Dadar and Nagar haveli Daman and Diu v)A and N island
           ii)Governor-- Can direct that a Parliament act does not apply to Scheduled area of that state.
           iii)Governor of Assam-- Same thing with Tribal areas. President have same powers w.r.t Tribal areas of Meghalaya, Tripura and Mizoram.





42nd Consti Amdmt Act transfered 5 State subjects to Concurrent list--> i)Education ii) Forests iii) Weights and measures iv)Wildlife v)Administration of Justice; 
                                                                           Constitution and organisation of all courts excpet HC and SC	.


As per 1935 GOI act, Residuary power were given to Governor General. Now it is with Centre.
Central law prevails over State laws, except when a state law has been taken to consideration by President and has received his assent. But parliament can still over ride it.

          Parliament can make laws on Subjects in State list in these 5 conditions:-
             i)Rajya Sabha Resolution(2/3rd members PandV)---> Remains in force for 1 year; Renewed any number of times; Ceases to exist after 6 months. 
                               [State Legislature can still make law on that suject but it not be inconsistent with the central law.]
           
             ii)During National Emergency--->Becomes inoperative after 6 months. tate Legislature can still make law on that suject but it not be inconsistent with the central law.
           
             iii)When 2 or more states make a request--->Apply only to those states; Such law can be amended or repealed only by Parliament. Ex- WPA,1972;  Water Prevention,1974 etc
           
             iv) To implement International obligation
           
             v)During President's Rule--->Continues to be in operation even after the Prez rule.  Can be later repealed by State legislature.



The Executive power w.r.t areas in Concurrent list, rests with State except when Constitution or parliamentary law specifically confers it to Centre. 



Mututal delegation of Executive powers--->
        i)President, with consent of State Government, etrust them with some executive functions of Central Government.
       ii)Governor, with consent of Central Government, entrust them with some executive functions of State Goverment.
       iii)Parliament, without even consent of State GOvernment, can entrust them with some executive functions of Central Government. This happens under a Legislation.
       iv)Same thing cannot be done by State legislature.


Taxation revenue Distribution:-
         
           a)Article 268- Taxes levied by centre but collected and appropriated by States---> i)Stamp Duties on various things.
         
           b)Article 269- Taxes levied and collected by centre but assigned to the States---> i)Inter State trade and commerce-->In accordance with Priciple laid down by the Parliament
         
           c)Article 269A-IGST levied and collected by centre but shared with states. --->In Manner provided by the parliament on recommendation of GST council. 
         
         
           d)Article 270- Taxes levied and collected by centre but Shared with States--->All taxes in Union list. 
                Except-->i) a,b,c ii)Surcharge as per Article 271 iii)Cess---->In Manner provided by the President on recommendation of Finance Commission.
         
         
           e)Article 271- Surcharge on 269 and 270 taxes. Kept by Centre. But Surcharge cannot be imposed on GST.
         
         
           f)Taxes Levied, Collected and Retained by States--->Mentioned in State list(18 in number) 
               Ex-> i)Land Revenue tax ii)Agri income iii)Estate duty iv)On lands and Buildings v)Mineral rights vi) Daaru-Ganja 
                  vii)Consumption and sale of Electricity viii)Sale of petol ix)Tolls x)Professional Tax xi)Entertainment xii)Stamp Duty



Non-Tax Revenue Distribution:-
           Centre-->Posts and Telegraph; Railways; Banking; Broadcasting; Coins and Currency; PSUs; Escheat and lapse etc
          
           States-->Irrigation; Forests; Fisheries; SPSUs; Escheat and lapse etc



Grant in Aid to States:
        Article 275--Statutory Grants--> To states which are in need of Financial assistance. Different sum for different states.
                                         
                                         Charged on consolidated Fund of India. 
                                         
                                         Given on Recommendation of Finance Commission.	Also- Specific grants for ST welfare. 
       
       
        Article 282--Discretionary Grants-->i) To help state financilly ii) Coordinate State action to effectuate national plan.






GST Council--> Article 279-A- Joint forum of C and Ss- 

i)Taxes,cesses, surcharge levied by centre,state and local bodies 

ii) Goods and Services that maybe sujected to GST or exempted from GST

iii)Threshold limit of turnover 

iv)Floor rates 




Finance Commission--> Article 280-  i)Quasi-Judicial body ii)Constituted by President every 5th year
 iii)Distribution of net proceeds of taxes iv)Principle for Grant-in-aid v)Augment Consolidated Fund of State 





INTER STATE RELATIONS:-
   1)Inter State Water dispute:-
        i)Article 262-->a)Parliament can adjudicate on IS river valley disputes.
                        b)Parliament can stop any court form adjucating such disputes.
        ii)Parliament Inacted   i)River Boards Act,1965                     and      ii)ISWD Act,1965 --Decision Final and Binding. Ex- Krishna,Godavari and Narmada WDTs were setup in 1969	
                                 Establishment River boards for regulation                    Establish ad-hoc tribunal for adjudication of dispute between                     
                                 and development of IS river valley.                          2 or more states in relation to waters of Inter State river or river valley.

   2)Inter State Councils:-

      i)Article 263--> President can establish such council at any time. 
                       Investigate and Discuss subjects on which C and Ss have common Interests. Make recommendation for better coordination of policy and action. PM is the chairman. 

                      i)Central Council on Health and Family Welfare 
                      
                      ii)Central council on Local Government 
 
                     iii)Regional council for sales tax for- i)Norther ii)Eastern iii)Western iv)Southern
     
    ii)Sarkaria Commission(1983-88) wanted it to be named as Inter-Government Council.
  
   iii)1st such council was setup by Janta Dal government in 1990. Secretariat was setup in 1991. Head- Secy to GOI. Also fuctions as secretariat of Zonal Councils.
             Standing Committee of the council--In 1996; Home Minister is the chairman. 
    
    3)Zonal Councils:-
       i)Under States Reorganisation act,1956--5 zones. Members--Home Minister+CMs of states of zones+2 other ministers from each state. 
         HOME MONISTER is the common chairman of all zonal councils. 
      ii)North Eastern Council under NEC act,1971.








	  




EMERGENCY PROVISIONS- To safeguard SUI,Security, Democratic political system and Constitution.


   i)Article 352- Emergency due to war, external agression or Armed rebellion. ('National Emergency','Prclamation of Emergency' used for this only).
        
        
          a)war,external agression--'External Emergecy'; Armed rebellion(Earlier-Ineternal Disturbance)--'Internal Emergency'.  
        
          b)Entire country or a part of it(42nd Amdmt).  
        
          c)President-Proclaim- Only after written recommendation from Cabinet(44th Amdmt)
        
          d)Can be challenged in courts on grounds of Malafide or absurdity.
        
          e)Must be approved by both house of Parliament(Special Majority-44th Amdmt) within 1 month(44th Amdmt).
            If approved, goes on for 6 months, can be extended indefinitly with Parliamentary approval every 6 months(44th Amdmt). 
        
          f)May be revoked by President at anytime, without parliamentary approval.   But, if Lok-Sabha(only) dissapproves(Simple Majority) continuity he must revoke(44th Amdmt).
        
          g)Effects:-
                I)Centre can give Executive directions to states on any matter. State Govs are not suspended but are bought under complete control of Centre.
               II)Parliament can make laws on any subject mentioned in state list. State Legislatures are not suspended but can be over ridden.    
                  Laws made become inooperative 6 months after Emergency goes away.  Applies to all states, not just the state where Emergency has been applied(42nd Amdmt).
              III)President can modify constitutional distribution of revenues b/w C and Ss. 
               IV)Life of Lok-Sabha and State legislatures can be extended 1-year a time by law of Parliament. 
                V)Fundamental Rights:-
                        
                         i)Article 358- Article 19 is automatically suspended for entire duration of Emergency, for whole country . 
                         44th Amdmt--Only on Grounds of 'War and Extrernal Aggression' and for 'Armed Rebellion'; Only laws related to emergency protected from Judicial review by court.
                        
                        ii)Article 359- President can suspent enforcement of FRs for some period or Entire duration of Emergency, for some part or whole country.
                            (Order must be approved by each house of Parliament).  44th Amdmt-- Can't touch Article 20 and 21. 



   ii)Article 356- Emergency due to Failure of constitutional machinery in states. ('President's Rule','State Emergency', 'Constitutional Emergency').
         
         
           a)Article 355- Duty of centre/State Goverments/Follow Constitution.
         
           b)2 grounds--i)Article 356- Accordance with constitution  ii)Article 365- When state fails to comply with direction from centre.  
         
           c)Must be approved(Simple Majority) by Parliament within 2 months. If approved, PR goes on for 6 months. Can be extended to max. period of 3 years. 
         
           d)44th Amdmt- Beyond 1 year PR can be only extended if--i)Natioanl Emergency  is in place ii)E C says that elections cannot be held.
         
           e)Maybe revoked by President at any time without any parliamentary approval.
         
           f)Effects:- 
                I)President can takeup fucnctions of State Governor and powers vested in Governor.
         
               II)He can declare the Powers of State legislatures will be exercised by Parliament.
         
              III)He dismissed the State council of ministers, and the Governor carries out the admin. with help of Chief secy of State/Advisors of Prez. 
         
               IV)He either suspends or Dissolve the state assemblies. Parliament passes State bills and budgets. 
                         Here:-i)Parliament can delegate the rule making power of state to Prez/Any other authority. 
                              ii)He can authorise expenditure from State's CF, and he can pomulgate ordinance for state when parliament is not in session.
         
               V)Laws made by Parliament/President continue to be in operation even after PR has been lifted.
         
         
           g)Proper Uses:-
                 i)Hung Assembly; ii)Majority party not forming gov; iii)When Ministry resigns after defeat in assembly; iv)Article 365; v)Article 355; vi)Physical breakdown- Gov willfully not doing anything.
         
         
           h)Improper Uses:-
                 
                 i)When Ministry resigns and Governor recommends imposition of PR without probing possibility of alt.Ministry
         
                ii)Without allowing Min. to prove it's majority
                
                 iii)Small Internal disturbances 
                 
                 iv)Maladmin 
                 
                 v)Without prior warning 
           
           i)Most PR's in a state--Manipur(10); zero PRs--> Chattisgarh, Telangana; In UTs-- Delhi(1), Puducherry(6), Jammu and Kashmir(1)
              

   iii)Article 360- Financial emergency due to threat to Financial stability or credit of India.
             a)Must be approved(Simple Majority) by Parliament within 2 months. However, it goes on indefinitely till revoked.
               Maybe revoked by Prez at anytime, without Parliamentary approval. 
             b)Money bills of states may be reserved for Prez's approval.  Prez may ask to reduce salaries, even of SC and HC judges



PRESIDENT
    Union Executive--> President, VP, Prime Minister, CoM, Attorney General of India.
    
    
    Election of Prez:
           i)Ellectoral College-->i)Elected MPs ii)Elected MLAa iii)Elected MLAs or Delhi and Pudhucherry------> Make president representative of Union and States equally.
    
          ii)Value of Vote of MLAs= [Total Population of State]/[Total elected MLAs*1000] ; Value of Vote of MPs= [Total MLA vote value]/ [Total elected MPs].
    
         iii)All disputes regarding election are heared by SC, decision final and binding. 	
    
          iv)Qualifications:  Citizen; >35years; Qulaified for election as member of Lok Sabha; No office of profit 
    
           v)Oath-->Faithfully Execute Office; PPD consti and law; Devoted to service and well being of Bangladesh...oh I mean India. 
                    Administered by CJI or Senior Most judge of SC in his absence
    
          vi)5 year term; Can resign anytime by writting to Vice-President ; eligible for re-election any number of terms. [Only Rajendra Prasad has occupied the office for 2 terms]
    
         vii)Can be impeached for violation of Constitution:
                   i)Motion must be passes by Majority of 2/3rd members of both house.  
                  ii)Nominated MPs participate; MLAs don't participate.
         vii)To prevent 'Interregnum', a sitting prez remains in office even after the expiry of his term before new Prez is elected and starts asking him to vacate the Rashtrapati Bhawan.
    
        viii)When president Resigns,is Impeached or commits Harakiri, VP holds the office till a new President is Elected. If no VP, CJI holds office. 
    
    
    
       
    Executive powers:
          i)Appoints PM and other Ministers. They hold office during his pleasure. 
    
         ii)Appints Attoreny General of India. He holds office durinf his pleasure.
    
        iii)Appoints CAG, CEC+ECs, UPSC chairman+Members, Governors, FC-Members+Chairman etc. 	
    
         iv)Appoints Commissions for SC/ST/OBC.
    
          v)can appoint Inter-State Council.
    
         vi)Directly admins UTs through admins appointed by him.
    
        vii)Can declare an Area Schedule Area; Has powers w.r.t Admin of Schedule areas and Tribal Areas.
   
     Legislative powers:
           i)Summon or Prorogue the Parliament/ Dissolve the Lok Sabha. Can summon Joint Sitting.
    
          ii)Appoint any MP to preside over their house, if office of speaker or Chairman falls vacant. 
    
         iii)Nominates 12 members of Rajya Sabha- Lit/Science/Art/Social-Service
    
          iv)Decided on questions as to disqualification of MPs in consultation with EC.
    
           v)Some bills require his permission before introduction--Money Bills, Changing Boundries/Creating new states etc.
    
          vi)Parliamnetary bills(Article 111)-->i)GIve Assent ii)Withold assent iii)Return for reconsideration(If Passed again, have to give assent). Prez has A,S,P veto. 
    
         vii)State Bills, if reserved by Governor for his consideration(Article 201)-->
                *i)GIve Assent ii)Withold assent iii)Return for reconsideration(except money bill, if Passed again,not necessary to give assent)
    
        viii)Promulgate Ordinance(Articel 123)- When Parliament is not in session--Have to be approved within 6 weeks of reassembly. Only on issues in Central list. 
             (Max-Life-->6months+6weeks). Can be retrospective; may modify or repeal any act of Parliament. Can alter or ament a tax law.
    
          ix)Lays reports of CAG, UPSC, FC etc before Parliament.
    
           x)Make regulations for peace, progress and GG of i)A and N ii)Lakshadweep iii)D and N iv)D and D v)Ladakh.(Also for puducherry when assembly is suspended/Dissolved).
      
     Judicial Powers:
           i)Appoints CJI, SC and HC judges.
    
          ii)Seek advice from SC on any question of law/fact--Advice not binding.
    
         iii)Grant Pardon, reprieve, respite, remission etc. Power to be exercised on advice of Union Cabinet.
                    For offence agaisnt a Union Law; For Court martial; Death Sentence 
                
                             Pardon--> ja simran ja, jile apni jindagi
                        Commutation--> Replacing with a lighter punishment(Death->Life imprissonment)
                          Remission--> Shortening the period(Ex- 12 year jail--2 year)
                            Respite--> Commutation because of some special fact, such as pregnancy/Physical difficulty
                            Reprive--> Stay of execution of sentance for temporary period
                         
               (Governor also has the same powers w.r.t state laws----But i)Not for Court Martial ii)Only Prez can pardon Death Sentence, Gov can Suspend/Remit/Commute death sentence)
    
          President has no constitutional discretion, but some situational discretions:
                     i)Appointing PM when no party has a clear majority/ When PM committs Harakiri and there is no successor.
                    ii)Dismissal of CoM when it loses confidence in Lok Sabha.
                   iii)Dissolution of Lok Sabha if CoM has lost Majority. 
              

           *So far 2 presidents have died during their terms--Zakir hussain and Fakhruddin ali Ahmed. I'm not saying anyhting....Just pointing out the facts. 




VICE-PRESIDENT
   
       i)Elected by MPs only (Both elected and Nominated). Method of election is same as that of Prez. 
   
      ii)Qualifications:  Citizen; >35years; Qulaified for election as member of Rajya Sabha; No office of profit 
   
     iii)Oath- Admin by President.
   
      iv)5 year term; Resign by writting to President. Can be removed(No grounds mentioned)--
          Resolution passed by Majority of members of Rajya Sabha(Effective Mjority) and agreed on by Lok-Sabha(Simple Majority). 
   
      v)Acts as Chairman of Rajya-Sabha. Acts as prez for max period of 6 months(before new prez is elected) if Office of prez is empty due to resignation, impeachment or Harakiri.
   
   
     

PRIME MINISTER 
   
    Article 74- There shall be CoM headed by PM to advice the President 
   
    Article 75- PM appointed by prez, other ministers appointed on advice of PM. They hold office during pleasure of president. They are collectively responsiblt to Lok Sabha.
    
    The resignation or Death of PM automatically dissolves the Council of Ministers. 
   
    Chairman of Niti Aayog; National Intergration Council; IS council; National Water Resource council etc
   
   
   
   
    
COUNCIL OF MINISTERS
   
     Total Number of ministers should be less than 15% of total strength of LS.(91st Amdmt)
   
     Mininsters are entitles to:
   
         i)Speak in any house
   
         ii)Take part in joint sittings
   
        iii)Speak in a committee of parliament of which he may be named a member.
   
    Ministers take oath of secrecy to President.
    Cabinet Ministers--Head of Ministeries; Part of Cabinet(Defined in Article 352, was inserted by 44th Amdmt)
    Ministers of State-> Attached to cabinet ministers or given charge of some ministries/Departments. Not part of Cabinet. Attend Cabinet meetings only when asked to come.
    Dy.Ministers->Not given independent charge of ministries/Depts. Don't attend meetings
4





CABINET COMMITTEES
     Not mentioned in Constitution, but in 'Rules of Business'. 
     Setup by PM as per time and requirement. 	Members 3-8.(may include non-cabinet members). If PM is part of a committee, he heads it.
     8 CCs currently function--Political Affairs; Economic Affairs; Appointments; Security; Parliamentary Affairs(Headed by Home Minister); 
     Accomodation; Investment and Growth; Employment and skill dvpt.
     




PARLIAMENT- Lok Sabha + Rajya Sabha + President 



    i) Rajya Sabha-- Fixed Max strength 250(238 representatives of States and UTs + 12 Nominated by Prez)

                      - Elected by elected MLAs.  Only 3 UTs have representatives in RS(Delhi, Puducherry, J and K)

         COnstitution has not fixed the term of Rajya sabha. It is decided by parliament--RPA,1951--6 year term   

         Must be > 30 years of Age


     ii) Lok Sabha-- Fixed Max Strength 552(530-States; 20 UTs).
                      - Elected by people > 18 years(61st Amdmt,1988); UT--Parliament decides the manner--Now also directly elected 
         Must be >25 years of age. 

      Disqualifications:

          i)Must not have gone to jail for > 2years(Except PD). ----President's decision(After obtaining opinion of EC) is final over question of Disqualification  

         ii)10th Schedule- Anti-Defaction--> i)Gives up membership of his party ii)Votes agaisnt/ Don't vote with party iii)Independent member joins a political party 
                                                                                iv)Nominated member joins a party after 6 months.  -----Chairman/
             Speaker's decision is final over question of disqualification w.r.t 10th schedule.
       
          i)If elected as a member of Both house---i) Seat in Rajya sabha becomes vacant on default after 10 days.
         ii)If sitting MP elected to other house--->Seat in 1st house becomes vacant.
        iii)If member of State legislature and parliament---Seat in Parliamnet becomes vacant.

     
   MPs take oath of affirmation before PRESIDENT 

       Member may resign by writting to Chairman/Speaker. 
       If a disqualified Guy is elected to Parliament---As per RPA,1951--- High Court can declare the election void. 




   Speaker : Head of Lok-Sabha; Guardian of Powers and privileges of LS members; 1st came in 1921, from GOI act,1919(Montford), before GG used to preside over Central legislative council. 

      i)When LS is dissolved he does not vacate his seat till new Lok-Sabha meets. 

     ii)can allow secret sitting at the request of Leader of House. 

    iii)Appoints chairman of Parliamentary committess of Lok Sabha. Himself head-- General Purpose committee; Rules Committee; Business Advisory committee

     iv)Can be removed only by a resolution passed by LS by a majority of members of the house. He can vote at the 1st instance during the voting.(Unlike Chairman of Rajya Sabha)

      v)When Dy.Speaker is appointed to a Parliamentary committee he automatically becomes it's chairman.

     vi)Both speaker's and Dy. Speaker's salaries are charged on the CFI.

    vii)Speaker nominated a panel of < 10 chairperson, who can preside over the house in case both speaker and Dy. Speaker are absent.
            ( When vacant- President decides who gets to be the speaker).

   viii)In a new Lok-Sabha, President appoints(mostly the seniormost) a speaker-pro-tem and admins his oath. SPT presides over the 1st sitting of new LS. 
            His duty- Admin oath of new members. 
     ix)He can resign by writting to Dy.Speaker.
    
  
  Chairman : Vice President; He is not a member of RS, therefor he cannot vote in the first instance. But he can cast a vote when votes are equal. (same for Dy.Chairman)
   
   
  When Lok-Sabha is dissolved- all the motions, resolutions, notices, petitions pending before it or it's committees lapses. (Except some by Comittee on Gov.Assurances)
          i)A bill pending in Lok Sabha lapses (Whether it came from Rajya sabha or not)
         ii)A bill pending in Rajya Sabha--Lapses if passed by Lok Sabha
                                         --Does not lapse if not passed by Lok Sabha  
        iii)A bill to be voted in Joint sitting does not lapse
         iv)A bill passed by both houses but pending assent of President, or returned by him for reconsideration does not lapse 
     
                          (Therefor, only those bills which were only passed by Lok sabha, lapses on dissolution of Lok sabha, Duh)

  1st--Question Hour( Rules of Procedure )
  Starred Questions-->Require Oral answers and Supply questions can be asked                  {Star-Speaks}
  UnStarred Quesions-->Require Written Answers and Supply questions cannot be asked
  Short Notice Questions--> Answered orally
   
  2nd-- Zero Hour(Indian Invention, Not mentioned in Rules of procedure)

      Motions 
       i)|Substantive Motion:- Proposal dealing with Very important matter like Impeachment of President etc
      ii)|Substitute Motion:- To replace the original motion.
     iii)|Subsidiary Motion:- 
         |    a)Ancillary Motion:- Regular way to proceed for various businesses.
         |    b)Supersiding Motion:- In course of a debate to supersede that issue. 
         |    c)Amendment:- To modify or Substitute a part of the original motion. 
      iv)|Closure Motion:- To cut the debate and put the matter to vote. 
         |    a)Simple Closure
         |    b)By compartments:- Clauses grouped into parts and entire parts are put to vote.
         |    c)Kangroo :- Only important clauses are debated
         |    d)Guillotine:- French Invention to cut short King and queen's length. 
       v)|Privilege Motion:- When a minister has committed a breach of privilege, by withholding facts/ giving wrong facts. 
      vi)|Calling attention Motion:- of A minister to an urgent public matter. (Indian Invention, but mentioned in Rules of Procedure)
     vii)|Adjournment Motion:- Only Lok Sabha has this device. Requires support of 50 members. Interupts regular business. 
         |        Can't for breach of Privilege. It is to debate about some important matter.
    viii)|No-Confidence Motion:- Article 75, need 50 support. Moved against entire CoM.
      ix)|Confidence Motion: When called by president to prove their majority. 
       X)|THANKS:- 1ST session of new lok sabha + Every fiscal year. If motion is defeated--Govt. may lose confidence. 
     *xi)|Censure Motion--To censure individual minister/Group of minister or Entire CoM. If passed CoM need not resign. 
      

      Point-of-Order--> When normal rules are not being follwed. Suspends proceedings before the house. 
     
      All Resolutions belong to category of Substantive Motions. All resolutions are put to vote(Not all motions are voted). 






     Passage of Bills:
         i) Ordinary Bills--5 stages; can be introduced by any MP. 
             a)1st reading- Introducer takes leave of the houese and introduce the bill. No discussions. Later- Bill is published in Gazette of India. 
             b)2nd reading- Detailed scrutiny+Assume final shape. 
                  i)General Discussion- Principles and provisions are discussed. House can take the bill to consideration; Refer to Joint or select committees or circulate for public views.
                 ii)Committee Stage- Usually sent to select committee--Examined clause-by-clause. Can amend the provisions(without changing the priciple). Sends bill back to house.
                iii)Consideration Stage- Clause by Clause, dicussed and voted seperately. Amdmts can be moved here by members.
             c)3rd reading- Debate confined to acceptance or Rejection of bill as whole. No Amdmts. Voted, Authenticated by presiding officer, sent to other house. 
             d)Bill in 2nd house(Hillary mad)- Same shit all over again. 
             e)Assent by Prez. 
       

        ii) Money Bills-- Artile 110;  Decision of Speaker is final - Cannot be questioned in Courts/Parliament/Even Prez. 
               i)Anything to do with taxes ii)Borrowing money by GOI iii)CFI paymets/custody/Expenditure charged 
              ii)Can only be introduced in lok Sabha, and only on prior recommendation of Prez. 
             iii)Only Minister can introduce.
              iv)Rajya Sabha can go fuck itself for 14 days. 
               v)Prez can either give or withold his assent, but cannot send it back for reconsideration. 

        iii) Financial Bills-- i)Money Bills- Article 110 ii)Financial Bills(I)-Article 117(1) iii) Financial Bill(II)- Article 117(3) 	
               a)Financial Bills(I)- Same as Ordinary bill except that:-
                   Can only be introduced in Lok Sabha and only on prior recommendation of President. 


               b)Financial Bills(II)- Deals with expenditure from Consolidated fund of India.      Same as Ordinary bill except: 
                   Can only be passed when president recommends to that house the consideration of the bill.(Weird)

            
     Budget- Article 112 
           Only Lok Sabha can vote on Demand for Grants. 
           CFI charged expenditure can just be discussed by the parliament. 
                   i)Prez ii)Speaker/Chairman, Dy Speaker/Dy chairmen iii)SC judges iv) Pensions of HC judges v) CAG vi)UPSC chairman and Members vii)Debts of GOI etc
 
        
          
PARLIAMENTARY COMMITTEE:
    I)Public Accounts committee-- Setup in 1921, under GOI Act,1919. 
          i)22 members(15 Ls, 7 RS). Members elected every year as per Proportional represntation on 1 year term. 
         ii)Minister cannot be a member. 
        iii)Chairman Appointed by Speaker. Mostly from opposition party.
         iv)Examines the annual [audit reports] of CAG which laid before parliament every year.  
                                a) On appropriation accounts--Compare actual expenditure with Expenditure sanctioned by parliament through Appropriation Act
                                b) On Finance accounts-- Shows annual receipts and disbursments of Union GOv.
                                c) On PSUs
          v)Discover technical irregularities + Bring out cases of waste, corruption, loss, extravagance, inefficiency and nugatory expanses. 
         vi)CAG acts as a Guide, friend and philosopher of the committee. 
        vii)ISSUES with PAC
              a)Not concerned with the policy in broader sense.
              b)Conducts post-mortem examination of accounts. 
              c)Cannot intervene in matters of day-to-day administration.
              d)Recommendations are advisory and not binding on the ministries.
              e)Not vested with powers of dissallowance of expenditures by the ministries.
              f)Cannot issues orders, only parliament can take decisions on it's findings.





  

    II)Estimates Committee-- Setup in 1921. a.k.a 'Continous economy commitee'
       *i) 30 members- all from Lok Sabha.  Members elected every year as per Proportional represntation on 1 year term. 
       ii)Minister cannot be a member.
      iii)Chairman appointed by Speaker. Mostly from Ruling party.
       iv)Examins the estimates included in the budget and suggest 'economies' in public expenditure. 
                    a)Report what economies, improvement in organisations, efficiency and admin. reforms consistent with policy underlying can be affected.
                    b)Suggest alt. policies to bring economy and efficiency in administration.
                    c)Examine if money is well laid out within limits of policy implied in estimates.
                    d)Suggest forms in which estimates are to be presented before the parliament.

        v)ISSUES with Estimates committee:
                    a)Examines buget estimates only after they have been voted in the parliament.
                    b)cannot question the policy laid down by the Parliament.
                    c)Recommendations are advisory and not binding on the ministries
                    d)Examines only few ministries each year by rotation.
                    e)CAG is not available as an expert.
                    f)Does postmortem work.
    

     III)Committee on Public Undertakings: Setup in 1964
            i)22 members(15 LS, 7 RS). Members elected every year as per Proportional represntation on 1 year term. 
            ii)Ministers cannot be a member. 
            iii)Chairman Appointed by Speaker. Only from Lok-Sabha.
            iv)Examines the reports and accounts of PSUs. 
                      a)Examines reports of CAG on PSUs.
                      b)Examine whether the affairs fo PSUs are being managed with sound Bussiness and commercial principles.
         
             v)Issues:
                   a)can only examine about 10-12 PSUs every year.
                   b)Post mortem work.
                   c)Members are not technical experts.
                   d)Recommendations only advisory. 




    
     IV)Departmental Standing Committees:- To secure more accountability of the executive to the parliament. Assist the Parliament in debating the budget more effectively.
             i)31 members(21 LS,10 RS). Cover all ministries. Members nominated by speaker/Chairman.
             ii)Minister cannot be a member. 
            iii)Total 24 DSCs--8 work under Rajya sabha, 16 under lok sabha.
            iv) They consider the Demand for grants for each ministry. ALso their annual reports and bills pertaining to these ministries.





    
      V)Consultative Committees--> Platform of discussion between ministers and MPs.
                i)Attached to various ministries/Dept. of Central Government.
               ii)Minister of that ministry acts as the chairman. 
              iii)Constituted by Min. of Parliamentary affairs.
	       iv)Dissolves when New lok-sabha is constituted. 





     VI) Parliamentary Forums:- Platforms for MPs to consult with minister, experts and key officials from nodal ministries.
               i)Speaker is the president of all forums except- Forum on Population and Public health--< Chairman of RS is the head.
              ii)Each forum- 31 members(21 Ls; 10 RS)







SUPREME COURT:- Integrated Judiciary- Single system of courts- Adopted from GOI act,1935.

      i)Supreme Court-  January28,1950. 	Replaced British Privy council as the highest court of appeal
     ii)34 judges.
    iii)Appointment:
          a)Appointed by President. Chief Justice is appointed After consultation with such judges of SC and HCs as he deem necessary. 
          b)Other judes appointed after consultation with CJI and suc.......Consultation=Obligatory for judges other than CJI.
          
         1st Judges case(1982)- Consultation not equal to Concurrence. 
         2nd Judges case(1993)- Consultation=Concurrence; But CJI will only give advice after consulting with 2 seniormost colleagues + Only seniormost judge could be the CJI.
         3rd Judges case(1998)- Consultation of plurality judges. Collegium of 4 judges. 
         4th Judges case(2015)- Natioanl judicial appointment commission(99th Amdmt) is null and void. 
        
     iv)Qualification:-

         a)Judge of HC for 5 years or Advocate of HC for 10 years or A distinguished jurist in the opinion of president.

         b)No minimum age. Must be citizen of India.

      v)Oath: Before president

     vi)Holds office till 65 years of age. 	Can resign by writing to President. 	Can be removed by Prez on recommendation of Parliament.	

     vi)Removal: -Special majority of Both houses, on grounds of Proved misbehaviour and incapacity. 

    vii)President can appoint acting CJI if office is vacnat.

  *viii)CJI can appoint ad-hoc judges(From HC for temporary period) if their is lack of quoram to hold trials.

          He can also ask retired SC or HC judges to do the same thing. 

   *ix) Constitution declares Delhi as the seat of SC. But CJI can appoint other seats as well.(Only with prez's approval)

   x)Judges are banned from practicing after retirement.
    
    Constitutional cases or refrenced made by president under Article 143 are decided by > 5 judes; Rest by single judges. 

    Original Jurisdiction--i)Between centre and one or more states; Between states
                           ii) SC have exclusive original jurisdiction
                          iii)A case by pvt. citizen against centre or state cannot be discussed under this. 

   *exception:- i)Pre-Consti treaty ii)I S W disputes iii)Matters referred to FC iv)Ordinary disputes of commercial nature b/w C and Ss. 




  Advisory Jurisdiction--Article 143-- Prez can ask question on 2 categories:    In both case opinion is only advisory/Not binding on prez. 
                                         i)Question of law/fact of public importance--SC may or may not give advice. 
                                        *ii)pre-constitutional treaty disputes---------SC must tender it's opinion.            
    other powers:
              i)Decides on disputes regarding election of President and Vice-president. 
             ii)Enquires into UPSC member's conduct when asked by Prez to do so---Advice binding on Prez.



            


GOVERNOR:- Independent Constitutional office but acts as an agent of Centre in the state.

    State Executive- Governor, CoM, CM, Advocate General 

    Must be over 35 years of age.

    Chief Justice of High court admins oath of Governor. Resigns by writing to President.

    There should be a Tribal welfare minister for the state of- Chattisgarh, MP, Jharkhand, Orissa

    He appoints the Advocate General of the state who holds office during the pleasure of Governor.

    He appoints the State EC, but he can only be removed in the manner same as HC judge.

    *He appoints chairman and members of SPSC, but they can only be removed by the President. 

    He can recommend the imposition of constitutional emergency in the state by the president.

    He nominated 1/6th members of State legislative council + 1 Anglo-Indian in State Assembly.

    He decides on the question of disqualification of members of State legislature in consultation with Election Commission.

    He can send the bill back to reconsideration, but if the bill is passed again he has to give his assent.


    He makes appointments, postings and promotions of district judges in consultation with state HC.

  **42nd Amdmt(1976) has made the advice of cabinet binding on President but no such restriction exists for Governors.
  

CHIEF MINISTER :-
     Chairman of State planning Board.
     Vice-president of zonal commissions by rotation.	
     Member of Inter-State council and Governing council of NITI AAYOG 


     Only 6 states have Vidhan Parishad--Andhra Pradesh, Telangana, Maharashtra, Karnataka, UP, Bihar
   
     Legislative Assembly Strength--[60-500]. Arunachal Pradesh, sikkim, Goa [30-500]; Mizoram[40-500]; Nagaland[46-500].
     *LEgislative Council Strength--[40- (1/3rd of LA strength)] fixed by COnstitution but the actual strength is determined by the parliament. 
                Election:- 
                   i)1/3rd elected by members of local bodies
                  ii)1/12th elected by graduated of 3 year 
                 iii)1/12th elected by teachers
                  iv)1/3rd elected by MLAs form persons who are not MLAs
                   v)Remaining 1/6th are nominated by Governor.
     
    *MLA > 25 years old; MLC > 30 years old. 
    *Only a state resident can be nominated by Governor.
    *Must be an elector for Assembly constituency if he's running for MLA.
    *The ultimate power of passing an ordinary bill is with State assembly.  State Legislative Council can only delay[3months+1month].



HIGH COURT

     i)1862- HCs were setup in Calcutta, Bomaby and Madras; 1866- Hyderabad.


    ii)Constitution provides HC for each state. Presently- 25 HCs. 3 have jurisdiction in more than 1 state(7th Amdmt,1956). Only Delhi have HC among UTs.


   iii)Strength of HC is decided by the President. CJI is appointed by him after consultation with CJI+Governor.  CJI must consult with collegium of 2 senior most colleguese.


   iv)Qualifications- i)Have held Judicial office in India for > 10 years or ii) Advocate of HC > 10 years . No min. age. But Max Age- 62 years. Can resign by writting to PResident.


   *v)Unlike SC, there is no provision for Appointment of distinguished jurist.


   vi)President can transfer HC judge from 1 HC to other. CJI-Collegium of 4 senior most SC judges + the chief justices of those 2 states.


  vii)After retirement cannot practice except in Supreme Court or other HCs.


 viii)Constitution empowers Parliamnet and State legislature to change the jurisdiction and powers of HC. 



TRIBUNALS

    Added in constitution by 42nd Amdmt,1976. 

       i)Article 323A- Parliament can provide Administrative tribunals for disputes related to public services of Central, State, public corporations and other public bodies.

           a)Admin Tribunals act,1985- 1 CAT + SATs. ---Speedy and inexpensive justice to agrieved public servants.

           b)CAT- 1 chairman(65years)+ 65 members(62years) ; Appointed by President from both Judicial and administrative streams.

           c)Appointed(with approval of Appointments committee of cabinet) on basis of recommendation of High powered selection committee consisting of a SC judges, appointed by CJI. 

           d)Guided by pricipal of natural justice.

           e)Appeal against CAT first lie in HC, then to SC.

           f)President also appoints the Chairman and members of State Administrative Tribunals

      ii)Article 323B- Tribunals for other matters. Can be setup by both Parliament and state legislatures. 	


SUBORDINATE COURTS

     i)District Judges:

        a)Appointed by Governor in consultation with HC. 

        b)Qualifications:-  Advocate/Pleader for 7 years + Recommended by HC for appointment.

        c)Appointment of other judicial service members done by Governor after consultation with SPSC and HC.

        d)While dealing with Civil cases--District Judge; While dealing with criminal cases--Sessions Judge(Can impose capital punishment, but subjected to confirmation by HC)

        e)DJ has suppervisory power wrt all courts in his district.
    
     ii)Lok Adalats- Given statutory status under Legal Service Authority Act,1987.




        

SPECIAL PROVISIONS FOR SOME STATES:
    Article 371- Maharashtra and Gujrat --Gov can setup dvpt baords for Vidharbh, Marathavad and Saurashtra,kutch respectively. 

    Article 371A-Nagaland

    Article 371B-Assam

    Article 371C-Manipur

    Article 371D, Article 371E-- Andhra Pradesh

    Article 371F-Sikkim

    Article 371G-Mizoram

    Article 371H-Arunachal Pradesh

    Article 371I-Goa

    Article 371J-Karnataka



PANCHAYATI RAJ
 
   i)Committees:
 
 
       1)Balwant Rai Mehta(1957)- Recommended  Democratic Decentralisation. 3 tier PR system--Panchayat at village leve, Samitis at Block level and Zila parishad at district level.
                                               Direct election in Panchayats+Indirect in Samitis and Parishads. 
                                               Samiti--Executive body; Parishad--Advisory,coordinating and supervisory body.
                                               Collector--Chairman of Parishad.
                (1st-Rajashtahn(1959),later Most states created PR institutions by mid 60s--But different from each other)
   
       2)Ashok Mehta(1977)- Recommended - Revive and stregthen the declining PR system in country.  Replace 3 tier system with 2 tier--
                                          Parishads at District level+Mandal panchayats(Group of villages)
                                          Zila Parishad--Executive + Planning body
                                          Reserve seats for SC/STs.
                                           
       3)G.V.K Rao(1985)- Recommended- Inteas of Democratisation--Beurocratisation of Development administration has taken place.
                                       Zila Parishad--Unit of Plannig and development.  Transfer some planning fucntions of the state to these parishads and lower lever PRIs.
                                       Create post of District Development commissioner-- CEO of Zila Parishad.
                                       Hold regular elections.
       
       4)L.M.Singhavi(1986)- Recommended- PRIs should be constitutionally recognised, protected and preserved. 
                                          Establish Nyay panchayats for cluster of villages.
                                          Gave importance to Gram Sabha--Embodiment of Direct Democracy in India.
                                          More Financial resources to village panchayats.
                                          

       5)Thungon(1988)- Recommended- COnsti; 3tier systme;  PRIs to have a fixed tenure of 5 years; Collector- CEO of Parishad; State Finance commission in each state.; Women Reservation
   

       6)Gadgill(1988)- Recommended-  COnsti; 3tier systme; State Election commission ;Direct election at all level; Specify list for PRIs in constitution; Taxation powers
                                      Became basis for 73rd Amdmt


        
      ii)73rd Amdmt:    Gave practical shaoe to ARTICLE 40- Take steps to organise Village panchayats.
                   
                      i)3 tier system ; 21 year min age for contesting elections
                    
                     ii)All members at all tiers to be directly elected.
                   
                    iii)Chairperson at Intermediate and district level to be indirectly elected by the elected members.
                   
                     iv)Chairperson at the village level to be elected in such a manner, the state legislature may determine.
                   
                      v)ST/ST reservation.Even for Chairperson at all levels. 1/3rd seats reserved for Women. [Reservation not applicable to Arunachal Pradesh]
                   
                     vi)OBC reservation- If the state wants.
                   
                    vii)Panchayat constituted after dissolution of earlier panchayat before expiry of 5 years shall continue only for the remaining period.
                   
                   viii)The act does not apply to Nagaland, Mizora and Meghalaya + Schedule and Tribal areas of a state + Hill areas of Manipur + Darjeeling Gorkha Council.
                   
                     ix)11th Schedule--29 functions under Panchayats:
                                       Agri; Land improvement; Irrigation; Animal husbandry; Fisheries; Forestry; MFP; Khadi-cottage; Rural Housing; Drinking Water
                                       Fuel and Fodder; Means of Communication; Rural Electrification; Non-conventional energy sources; Poverty alleviation prog; Education etc
                                      
                      x)State election and FInance commission.
 
          Voluntary Provisions: 
                i)Giving power to Gram sabha at village levels or making them autonomus bodies or let them plan for eco development
               ii)Manner of election of chairperson of village panchayat(CVP). 
              iii)Represantions of CVP at Intermediate or district level.
               iv)Representations to MLAs and MPs in panchayats.
                v)Giving them financial powers.
               vi)Grant-in-aid to panchayats
              vii)OBC reservation
             
    
       iii)PESA act,1996--> Parliament can extend provisions of PR to Scheduled areas under 5th schedule. 
                         
                           i)Make Gram Sabha the nucleus of all activities.
                         
                          ii)Gram sabha must approve plans for socio-economic development + Is responsible for poverty alleviation programme 
                         
                         iii)Half of the seats reserved for tribal people. All Chairperson seats at all levels resrved for tribal people.
                         
                          iv)Recommendation of Gram Sabha necessary for grant of mining lease; minor minerals.
                         
                           v)Ownership of minor forest produce
                         
                          vi)Power to control money lending to tribals.
                         

MUNICIPALITIES
        
        
        1688- 1st Municipal corporation was setup in Madras.
        
        1870- Lord Mayo's resolution on Financial Decentralisation.
        
        1882- Lord Ripon's resolution on local self government.
        
        1919- Transfered subject under GOI act.
        
        
     74th Consti, act 1992: Consti. status to Muncies. 
     
                   i) 3 types: 
                   
                   	i)Nagar Panchayat:- Transitional Area; 
                  
                   	ii)Munci council:-Small urban area 
                  
                  	iii)Munci coporation:- Large urban Areas
                 
                  ii) Governor species which type of area based on:- Population; Pop-density; Revenue; % in non-farm sector; Eco-importance; other factors
                 
                 iii) Munic divided into wards--All members directly elected. Chairman--In manner provided by state legislature.
                 
                  iv) Ward committes in munci with pop>3lakh. 
                 
                   v) Seats reserved for SC/ST/Women. But reservation for Chairman seats or seats for OBC--Upto State legislature
                 
                  vi) Act does not apply to scheduled areas or tribal areas in the states. 	Should also not affect functions and powers of Darjelling gorkha blah blah.
                 
                 vii) A district planning committee --to consolidate the plans prepared by panchayats and Muncis in the district.--Compostion by state legislature.
                       (4/5th of members- Elected by elected members of Panchayats and Muncies)
                
                viii) Metro plannin committee--2/3 of members- Elected by elected members of Panchayats and Muncies


       Types:
           1)Munci Coporations: Delhi, Mumbai, Kolkota, Chennai etc
                
                 a)Established by acts of state legislatures.
                
                 b)Councils--Deliberative and legislative wing. Directly elected + Nominated councillors. 
                
                 c)Head=Mayor - Elected for 1 year renewable term. Main function-Preside over meeting .
                
                 d)Munci Commissioner--CEO of coroporation--Appointed by state gov. IAS
                 
           2)Municipality: Towns and smaller cities
                
                 a)In states- By act of states; In UTs- By act of parliament.
                
                 b)Head of Council- President/Chairman----Unlike Mayor, he not only presides over council meetings but have executive powers.
                
                 c)CEO- Day to day, general admin of Munci. Appointed by state gov. 

           3)Notofied Area Committee:  i)Fast dvping towns or ii) A town considered imp by state but does not have conditions for constitution of Munci.
                
                     a)Estb by notification of Govt gazette. Works under Munci acts but Only those provision apply which are present in notification. 
                
                     b)Entirely nominated body---By state gov. So it is not an elected or statutory body.
      
           4)Town Area Committee: i) Admin of Small town ii)Semi-Munci authority iii)Act of state legislature  iv)Maybe elected or nominated
    
           5)Cantonment Board: For Munci Admin for civilian population. Under cantonement act,2006. Works under Defence ministry.  Partly elected/Partly nominated
  
           6)TownShip: PSUs    7)Port Trust: In port areas. Created by act of parliament.    8)SPV: 


       Central Council of Local Government : -in 1954; Under Article 263 of gov. Only deals with ULBs. Advisory body




UNION TERRITORIES
       States which were UTs:- Himachal, Manipur, tripura, Goa, Arunachal, Mizo.(6)
       UT's with legislature-- Delhi, Puducherry, JandK 
       Parliament can make laws on any list for UTs, even for these 3.
       
       But, Legislative assembly of Puducheery can make any laws on State and Concurrent list subjects.
       
       And, Legislative assembly of Delhi can make any laws on State subjects(Except- Public order, Police and land) and concurrent list.
       
       And, Legislative assembly of JandK can make any laws on State subjects(Except- Public order, Police ) and concurrent list.


   Chief Minister of Delhi is appointed by President(not by lt.governor). Ministers hold office during his pleasure.
   In case of difference of opinion, lt. Governor has to consult the matter with president.
   Min. of Home affairs is the nodal ministry for all affairs related to UTs.


SCHEDULED AND TRIBAL AREAS
      5th Schedule--Admin and Control over S.Areas and S.Tribes In all states except--Meghalaya, Assam, Tripura and Mizoram
      
      6th Schedule--In these 4 states

              : President declares an Area as Scheduled Area, He can increase, decrease or change boundry lines in Counsultation with Governor.
      
              : Executive power of State extends to these areas, but Centre can give directions to states regarding admin of these areas.
      
                Each state with SA have to constitute Tribal Advisory Council-20 members(3/4th--Members of tribes in LA).
                Governor can declare that any Central or state law does not apply in SA. He can make regulations after consulting the TAC.
      
      
      
      
           

ELECTION COMMISSION
    
    Article 324--Power of Superintendence, direction and control of elections to parliament, state legislatures, office of president, VP.
    
                 CEC + Such numbers of ECs as president may decide. THey are appointed by President.
    
                 CEC have equal power with other ECs. They have a 6 year term ; < 65 years of age. 
    
                 CEC cannot be Removed as same manner as SC judge.  
    
                 Other ECs can be removed on advice of CEC.
    
                 ECs can work after retirement.
     Functions:
    
          i)Determine constituencies through delimitation commission act of parliament.
    
         ii)Determine Code of Conduct.
    
        iii)At state level EC is assisted by Chief Electoral officer who is appointed by CEC in consultation with state government.
    
         iv)He appoints a returning officer for every constituency, and presiding officer for every booth.
          


UPSC 
    
    Chairman and Members appointed by president, who also determines the strength.
    
    No qualifications, but 50% member must have held office in Govt for > 10 years.
    
    6 year term; < 65 years of age. Can resign by writing to president.
    
    Can be removed by president on account of:- i)Insolvency ii)Paid employment outside office iii)Chutiya aadmi iv)Misbehaviour(Have to refer to SC--Binding advice to President)
    
    Misbehaviour has been defined by constitution.
    
    UPSC chairman cannot work for Gov after retirement.
    
    UPSC members can only work as UPSC/SPSC Chairman after retirement.
    
    Not eligible for reappointment(No 2nd term) 
    
    UPSC is not consulted while making reservations in appointment/ Group C,D services/ Posts<1 year. 
    
    UPSC is consulted by gov for taking desciplinary action against civil servant
    
    UPSC's adivices are not binding on gov, but the gov have to specify to  parliament why the advice was not considered.



SPSC
   Appointed by governor. But can be removed only by president.(same manner as UPSC)

   6 year term; < 62 years. Resign by writing to Governor.

   SPSC chairman can only work as UPSC chairman or member after retirement. No 2nd term.

  JSPSCs are created as an act of Parliament(UPSC/SPSC are consti bodies). Setup by president.
  1st Central Public Service commission came up in 1926, after GOI act,1919. 
  GOI act,1935 provided PSCs for Centre as well as provinces.


FINANCE COMMISSION:- Quasi-Judicial body; Members eligible for reappointment.
                     Parliament decides, strength, functions powers etc.

CAG
  He can't work in gov after retirement.
                                               



















                                                    Articles 
                                                    
                                                    
                                                    
                                                    
                                                    
                                                    
                                                    
                                                    
                                                    
                                                    
